 
 
 
Authors 
Eleftheriou Androulla 
Angastiniotis Michael 
G LO B A L
THALASSAEMIA
R E V I E W
PERSPECTIVE
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©Thalassaemia International Federation 2024 
All rights reserved. 
 
The publication may not be reproduced nor copied 
for distribution, in whole or in part, without the 
prior written permission of TIF.  
 
Citation: Eleftheriou, A. & Angastiniotis M. (2024). 
Global Thalassaemia Review 2024, Thalassaemia 
International Federation. 
 
All reasonable efforts have been made to verify the 
information 
contained 
in 
this 
publication. 
Information is correct at the time of publication. 
Any updates are closely monitored and included in 
updated versions accordingly. 
 
The material in this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion by the authors or 
publishers concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area. the mention of 
specific manufacturers does not imply their 
endorsement in preference to others of a similar 
nature that are not mentioned. 
 
Published in Nicosia, Cyprus 
 
PUBLISHERS 
Thalassaemia International Federation 
PO Box 28807, 2083 Strovolos, Cyprus 
Tel: +357 22 319 129 
Fax: +357 22 314 552 
Email: thalassaemia@cytanet.com.cy 
Website: www.thalassaemia.org.cy 
ISSN pending 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors 
Androulla Eleftheriou, BSc, MSc, PhD 
Michael Angastiniotis, MD 
 
Editor 
Lily Cannon, B.Sc., M.A., M.Sc. 
 
Contributors 
Dimitris Farmakis, MD 
Eleni Antoniou, BA, MA, PhD Cand 
Elpidoforos Soteriades, MD, PhD 
Lily Cannon, BSc, MA, MSc 
Josep Darbà, PhD 
Sotiris Soteriades, PhD 
Meritxell Ascanio, MSc 
Ali Amid 
 
The Thalassaemia International Federation 
Board of Directors: 
• H.H Sheikha Sheikha Bint Seif Al-Nahyan 
• Panos Englezos 
• George Constantinou 
• Shobha Tuli 
• Loris Angelo Brunetta 
• Michele Maalouli Abi Saad 
• Vasileios Dimos 
• Bessie Calabria 
• Manal Zaatar 
• Amal Daoud 
• Anubha Taneja Mukherjee 
• Fatemeh Hashemi 
• Ahmet Varoglu 
• Maria Hadjidemetriou 
 
Design & Layout 
Stella Eleftheriou 
 
Photo Credits: 
All photos included are submissions received in the 
International Thalassaemia Day 2015 – 2019 
Photography Contests and taken during TIF 
Delegation visits.
 
 
Special Acknowledgement 
The Board of Directors of the Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF), and executive office staff, 
express their gratefulness and sincere appreciation to every single patient and parent, within or 
outside a national association, for their support, participation and invaluable contribution, without 
which the preparation and completion of this Global Thalassaemia Review (2021) would not have been 
possible. 
 
Special Appreciation 
The Board of TIF expresses its deepest and most sincere appreciation to Mr. Junping Yu, the 
responsible Technical officer for the official relations of TIF with the World Health Organization (WHO).  
Deep appreciation is expressed by the Board of Directors of TIF to the invaluable work of many 
decades performed by the WHO through a number of projects, programmes and recommendations 
promoted, and in particular, through diseases-specific decisions and resolutions. 
The TIF Board of Directors is most grateful to the global Healthcare Professional community and more 
specifically for the invaluable work of Dr Dimitris Farmakis, Dr Josep Darbà, Dr Soteris Soteriades and 
Ms. Meritxell Ascanio. 
Abbreviations/ Acronyms 
 
 
 
AABB 
Association for the Advancement of Blood and Biotherapies (formally the American Association 
of Blood Banks) 
ANC 
ante-natal care 
BT 
blood transfusion 
CDC 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention USA 
DALY 
the loss of the equivalent of one year of full health; DALYs for a disease or health condition are 
the sum of years of life lost due to premature mortality 
DFO 
desferrioxamine an injectable iron chelating agent 
DFP 
deferiprone an oral iron chelating agent 
DFX 
deferasirox an oral iron chelating agent 
EMA 
European Medicines Agency 
FDA 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
HDI 
Human Development Index: an index composed of three dimensions; life expectancy at birth, 
education, and per capita income 
HSCT 
haemopoietic stem cell transplantation 
HTA 
Health Technology Assessment 
IMR 
infant mortality ratio; the probability of a child born in a specific year or period dying before 
reaching the age of one; expressed as deaths per 1,000 live births 
LBS 
live births 
LMIC 
low- and middle-income countries 
MPI 
Multidimensional Poverty Index; range of indicators to calculate a summary poverty figure for a 
given population (e.g. health, education and standard of living indicators) 
MPI 
Migration Policy Institute: an independent think tank aiming to improve immigration and 
integration policies 
NIPT 
non-invasive prenatal test 
NTDT 
non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia 
NGO 
Non-governmental organisation 
NIHBT 
National Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion (Vietnam) 
PBM 
patient blood management; encompasses all aspects of the transfusion decision-making 
process, through to clinical management 
PND 
prenatal diagnosis 
PGT 
pre-implantation genetic testing 
QALY 
quality-adjusted life year is a generic measure of disease burden, including both the quality and 
the quantity of life lived; one QALY equates to one year in perfect health; calculated by 
multiplying the duration of time spent in a health state by the HRQoL weight (i.e. utility score) 
associated with that health state 
QoL 
quality of life; a concept which aims to capture the well-being of individuals but also measure it 
through validated tools 
RBC 
red blood cell 
SCD 
Sickle cell disease 
TDT 
Transfusion Dependent thalassaemia 
TM 
thalassaemia major 
YLLs 
expressed as deaths per 100 000 population. YLLs are calculated from the number of deaths 
multiplied by a global standard life expectancy at the age at which death occurs 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
2 
 
4 
 
14 
Forward 
1. Introduction 
2. The Prevention of 
Thalassaemia Revisited by 
Thalassaemia International 
Federation: A Historical and 
Ethical Perspective 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
60 
 
144 
3. Reviewing the Effectiveness 
of Thalassaemia Prevention 
Programmes: TIF’s Perspective 
in a Global Snapshot 
4. Blood – the Global Scene: 
TIF’s Perspective 
5. Iron Overload in 
Thalassaemia: Its Monitoring 
and Treatment: TIF’s 
Perspective 
 
 
 
 
 
168 
 
196 
 
220 
6. Global Review of MRI 
Services for Thalassaemia – 
TIF’s Perspective 
7. Multidisciplinary Care and 
Reference Centres in 
Addressing Haemoglobin 
Disorders 
8. Social Health Protection and 
Thalassaemia: Addressing the 
Social Determinants of Health 
for Improved Health 
Outcomes: TIF’s Perspective 
 
 
 
 
 
262 
 
284 
 
330 
9. Disability in Thalassaemia 
10. Estimating the Cost of 
Thalassaemia Care: TIF’s 
Global Contribution 
11. Disease Burden of 
Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassaemia: TIF’s 
Perspective 
 
 
 
 
 
410 
 
424 
 
452 
12. Thalassaemia Registries: A 
Call for Action - A Report of the 
Thalassaemia International 
Federation 
13. The Value of Patients’ 
Engagement 
14. Unmet Needs of Patients 
with Thalassaemia: TIF’s 
Perspective 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
1 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., & Eleftheriou A. 
 
FORWARD 
This GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW is dedicated to the joint work and collaboration of the Thalassaemia 
International Federation (TIF) with the World Health Organisation (WHO) in its status as an NGO in official 
relations since 1996 (2018-2025). 
TIF, in fulfilling its mission, has been guided and supported by the principles and vast experience of the WHO in 
the context of both disease specific decisions, resolutions and programmes, including public health 
programmes and policies, that are related to the control and management of a genetic, hereditary, multiorgan 
disease like thalassaemia. For such a disease there is today ample knowledge and experience on how to 
effectively prevent and appropriately manage it at the clinical level. Moreover, in recent years, research 
advances have been impressive both in the area of management but also in the area of cure giving great hope 
to the patients for their future.  
TIF, in its early efforts was guided by the Hereditary Disease Programme of the WHO headed by close and 
invaluable collaborators including Professors Anver Kuliev and Victor Boulyjenkov, who have supported and 
guided our work in a number of ways. In addition, and as TIF achieved the status of an “NGO in official relations 
with the WHO”, a number of other eminent health care professionals and relevant programmes’ leaders have 
supported our work including amongst others, Dr Neelam Dhingra, Mr Junping Yu, and Dr Yuyun Maryuningsih 
as well as the different Directors and officials of WHO Regional and country offices and Collaborating Centres 
around the world. 
TIF continues its efforts with an undivided commitment to continue through its work and partnerships with the 
global patient/parent associations and the large network of heath care professionals across the world, to fight 
for the rights of patients for equal access to quality health, social and other care. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors of TIF and the TIF office staff, we would also like to express our wholehearted 
gratitude and respect, to every single health care professional who has been with us from the beginning and 
without the support of whom the work of TIF would not have progressed positively towards achieving its 
mission. Special and particular gratitude goes to all patients, wherever they may live, who fight on an everyday 
basis for access to quality medical, social and other care including the safety, quality and adequacy of blood, for 
continuous availability of key essential drugs, social inclusion and, in more recent years, for access to innovative 
therapies and drugs that promise better quality of life and where possibly holistic cure – a long-awaited 
scientific development. 
Gratitude also goes to the researchers, academics, healthcare professionals, the industry and the relevant 
competent stakeholders for acknowledging and respecting the many and multiple unmet needs of patients 
with these disorders, and for investing in improving their lives, giving them hope and optimism. 
 
 
FORWARD 
2 
I hope that this Global Review which is a dynamic activity of TIF to be updated on a continual basis as reliable 
and new information becomes available, will give some, even gross, insights into the naked truth with regards 
to the provision and quality of services for this disease across the globe aiming to sensitize governments and 
competent authorities to revisit and implement the incredible work and the recommendations offered by 
WHO’s Resolution WHO EB118.R1 Thalassaemia and Other Heamoglobinopathies (2006), as well as the many 
other WHO related resolutions, recommendations and programmes. 
 
 
Mr Panos Englezos 
President 
Dr Androulla Eleftheriou 
Executive Director 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
3 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
4 
1. INTRODUCTION 
THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION (TIF) was born because of the realization that there 
are gross inequalities in the provision of disease specific services around the world and the belief that ‘we can 
do better’ for all patients if collective advocacy on behalf of the global patient community is presented to service 
providers and decision makers at national and international level. 
Beta thalassaemia, which is the condition which was, historically, the first concern of the founding members of 
the Federation, is an inherited inability of the organism to form beta globin chains, necessary to complete the 
haemoglobin molecule. The chain imbalance in the molecule is the basis of the pathophysiology [1, 2] resulting 
in ineffective erythropoiesis, severe anaemia, the need for regular, lifelong blood transfusions and iron 
accumulation in vital organs of the body requiring chelation on a daily and lifelong basis. As patients grow, 
various co-morbidities, based on the quality and level of disease specific services provided, make their 
appearance, requiring a well-coordinated and expert multidisciplinary care approach. Although there is a 
spectrum of severity, ranging from transfusion dependency from infancy to relative non-dependency (NTDT), 
the severe form (TDT) is more common in most populations. TDT, depending on the quality of services, or lack 
of services, has the following possibilities: 
 
 
 
 
• 
No treatment including no blood transfusion– death in early childhood, generally before the age 
of 5 years 
• 
Treatment based only on blood transfusion therapy - early death before reaching the second 
decade of life 
• 
Inadequate management – i.e. suboptimal transfusion therapy and ineffective iron load 
monitoring and treatment can only result in the postponement of death and poor quality of life. 
Survival is usually into the late teens or young adulthood. This is the experience of the majority of 
the global patient population, as this publication aims to demonstrate [3, 4]. Progress towards 
optimal patient care is slowly benefitting more patients but there is much ground to be covered  
• 
Optimal care (Table 1) is available to a minority of patients across the world who are being cared 
for in reference centres. These are mostly found in countries in which high disease prevalence is 
coupled with strong health infrastructures and relative prosperity. Long patient survival has been 
achieved in these countries but even so, this is still not equivalent to that of the general 
population. Quality of life is also greatly improved with optimal care, with patients achieving 
educational, career and social goals, at least in their majority  
• 
Curative treatments at present include haemopoietic red cell transplantation (HRCT) and in more 
recent years gene-based approaches have been authorized (FDA, EMA). At the time of writing this 
review, these approaches have reached only a tiny minority of patients. These curative treatments 
hold great hope that in the years to come [5, 6, 7], they will be generally available for all patients 
across the world. 
• 
A paragraph on innovative drugs and clinical trials. 
• 
In addition, drugs are in development for modifying disease programming, one of which has 
already gained authorization and others are in different stages of research and different phases 
of clinical trials. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
5 
Table 1. Necessary services for optimal management of TDT – the latest clinical trial updates (December 2024) 
1 
Adequate and safe blood donation for regular lifelong transfusions 
2 
Maintaining a pre-transfusion Hb of not less than 9g/dl to correct anaemia and minimise endogenous, 
ineffective erythropoiesis, and so marrow expansion. 
3 
Regular and specialised monitoring of iron load in vital organs 
4 
Daily iron chelation therapy with expert individual (personalised) management of iron overload 
5 
Coordinated, well-structured expert multidisciplinary approach to both monitor and, prevent the 
development of complications and managing organ involvement 
6 
Psychological support for the timely response to stress factors including special focus on self-
management and adherence to treatment 
7 
Social and financial support minimising or even eliminating out of pocket expenses 
 
Based on these disease specific requirements, TIF advocates for an ideal service for thalassaemia and other red 
cell disorders, including: 
1. Application of the Six Domains of Healthcare Quality as described by the IOM (Institute of Medicine, USA):  
Safety (avoiding harm to patients), Effectiveness (providing services based on scientific knowledge, 
evidence based), patient-centered element (provision of care that is respectful of and responsive to 
individual patient preferences, needs, and values), providing timely care (reducing waits and sometimes 
harmful delays), efficient and equitable service in which quality  is independent of personal characteristics 
such 
as 
gender, 
ethnicity, 
geographic 
location, 
and 
socioeconomic 
status. 
https://www.ahrq.gov/talkingquality/measures/six-domains.html. 
2. Service that is staffed by well trained and experienced doctors and nurses, without frequent turnovers. 
This includes a hierarchy based on merit. 
3. Adoption of internationally accepted guidelines and standards for clinical management. 
4. Presence of a multidisciplinary team which collaborates with the teating physician in monitoring and 
managing the condition and its complications. 
5. The presence of an electronic registry and medical record for each patient, and appropriate technology to 
monitor patient progress over time. 
6. Appropriate blood for transfusion and iron chelation medication provision at all times. 
7. Universal health coverage based healthcare and social national system to prevent out of pocket expenses 
burden the family. 
8. Availability and accessibility of diagnostic and laboratory services that are specialized are available in 
reference centres. 
9. The development, implementation and regular upgrading of a nationally coordinated prevention 
programme for at risk couples who wish to avoid the birth of affected children. 
The provision of such services is not available equally and to the same quality standards to affected patients 
within and across countries [3,4]. In fact, only a minority of patient benefits from the medical and scientific 
advances which have led to improved outcomes and survival in the management of haemoglobin disorders in 
the last 2-3 decades.  This is evident in the outcomes which are observed across all regions of the world. 
Thalassaemia is not unique in experiencing such inequalities. All chronic and rare disorders are the poor relatives 
in the stratification of what are considered priorities on the national healthcare and budgetary agendas [8,9]. 
Inequity is a global phenomenon which affects all aspects of life and is not confined to healthcare.  
Certainly, addressing global inequity in health is not a matter of simply exerting political pressure. Many public 
health, economic, social, racial and political factors influence policy making and health related decisions [, 10, 
11]. Nor is it a simple matter of affordability of services, even though economic prosperity does play a major 
role. Even within high resource countries health inequities and social gradients are found which are known to 
affect health outcomes [12]. 
INTRODUCTION 
6 
THE ECONOMIC DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH 
The question that has to be discussed is whether these inequalities in health outcomes are avoidable. One 
position is that since health service provision depends on socioeconomic circumstances which have such a wide 
variation globally, it is the socio-economic conditions that must be addressed first to allow for progress in 
quality of services. Faced with limited resources, spending should be prioritized to health threats which affect 
the majority, thus safeguarding an adequate level of community wellbeing. This logical approach has been the 
basis of the investment in primary care, of aiming for ‘maximum health gain for the money spent’ [8], which 
has led to the Alma Ata declaration of 1978 by the WHO. This approach has had a positive impact on health 
services globally. ‘The importance of genetic disorders tends to be recognized when infant mortality falls below 
40/1000 live births’, and this is related to the fact that before health authorities can consider and acknowledge 
addressing congenital and lifelong conditions as priorities, reduction of other causes of infant mortality must 
be first effectively achieved [13]. It is the philosophy based on which cost-benefit has become the motto of 
health planners and certainly, the application of evidence-based costing.  
THE RIGHT OF EACH INDIVIDUAL TO HEALTH 
The individual facing disability and premature death cannot be viewed simply as a health or financial burden. 
Any civilized society must protect its most vulnerable members based on the universal acceptance that health 
is a fundamental human right. Recognizing health as a right means recognizing the individual’s need to achieve 
the best possible in life. This need can only be visible if the affected individual speaks out and presents 
experiences and suffering to the community as well as to providers – the patient’s voice. This is very rarely heard 
where and when it is needed most and which is mainly at the level of services planning. Patient experience is 
not just the experience of ill health. It includes discrimination, poor access to medications, to proactive 
monitoring, to social integration, education, relations, friendships, networking, marriage and so many aspects 
and values of life. Reducing patients to a number (YYL, DALYs, QALYs) may be helpful in addressing and 
managing public health issues. but no indicator can adequately reflect on the experience of individual lives. So, 
the question is: should the focus then be on the individual or on the wider social good?  This dilemma is not just 
a philosophical query but must be seen in the context of practical health planning and balanced decisions taken.  
It moves the economists’ view of health to an ethical and philosophical realm that few have attempted to visit 
let alone try to tackle. 
 
THE ROLE OF TIF 
The creation of Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) in 1987, was considered as a continuation of the 
successful effort made in the 1960s and 1970s in the control of haemoglobin disorders in, mainly and primarily, 
the Southern Mediterranean countries, including Greece, Italy and Cyprus. Devoted parents mainly, but also 
young (at the time) patients, joined efforts with the few (at the time) interested, involved physicians and 
scientists, and WHO, sharing their vision that through a global umbrella organization research for further 
improvements could be achieved and this would encourage, strengthen and aid health authorities across the 
world to focus on haemoglobin disorders and the development of disease specific plans encompassing 
procedures and monitoring which were absent at the time from the majority of the “affected” countries of the 
world. This was, and still is the vision of TIF that mandates its mission, work and activities. The influence of 
united social groups was a real experience in some high prevalence countries and transferring their experience 
to other countries was based mainly on advocacy derived from successful outcomes in the national 
programmes established in their countries and which indeed changed the fortunes of patients wherever these 
were applied. The idea of sharing experiences in advocacy across borders, of transferring knowledge and 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
7 
presenting a united voice to local health authorities in individual countries and to official health regional and 
international bodies through an international consortium of patients/parents with medical back up, became a 
practical reality in 1987 in an international meeting in Milano, Italy where TIF was born. Since then, TIF has 
grown both geographically and in membership – at the time of writing this report representing over 270 patient 
associations in over 68 countries across Europe, Middle East, West Pacific, Southeast Asia, the Americas and 
North Africa. 
The contribution of TIF has been invaluable through the decades and its impact on the education of involved 
healthcare professionals as well as on the lives of patients themselves has been worldwide recognised 
healthcare professionals, decision makers, the community at large and in strengthening and empowering 
networks and collaborations in research and academia. 
The difficulty and multiple challenges in providing adequate care is faced particularly in low- and middle-income 
countries (LIMC) as well as in countries in which the haemoglobin disorders are very rare in the indigenous 
populations, irrespective of economic or social development. Despite some very significant improvements in 
the control and care achieved over the decades, gross inequalities which seem to be related to these two main 
factors, i.e. specific challenges country income and the rarity of these disorders continue, results in the majority 
of thalassaemia patients still poorly managed with high rates of morbidity and early death. 
 
LOW- & MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES (LMIC) 
There can be no doubt that resource restrictions play a major role in the inability of LIMC countries to reduce 
amenable mortality in chronic non-communicable diseases like thalassaemia, which are indeed resource 
demanding. If the objective is to reach the individual patient with evidence based clinical interventions aiming 
to reduce not only the possibility of early death but also to reduce complications through monitoring and 
secondary prevention, then examining resource availability must be supplemented by an enquiry into reasons 
why resources are not reaching our patient. This implies a need to examine factors that affect implementation. 
Where resources are limited certainly competition with other health needs is a factor that most of TIF’s national 
associations have to face. This means persuading health planners to provide thalassaemia patients with a larger 
slice of a pie that is already limited in size compared to the mouths that it is meant to feed. Advocacy in such a 
competitive situation is forced on support groups as a sad reality which results inevitably in winners and 
losers, a very unfair state for families and patients to have to work in. Yet survival of the most vocal, and 
the most politically connected is a reality within which TIF and its associations have been working for 
decades. Raising awareness, educating the public (an active participant in hereditary disease services), 
educating healthcare professionals and above all sensitizing health planners are all part of the same strategy to 
gain attention and support. Through such actions, patient driven associations endeavor to increase resources 
but support is often given in half measures in the effort of providers to satisfy as many of the pressure groups 
as possible. Even when support is gained implementation of services requires planning which in turn 
requires in depth knowledge of the total needs of a multi-organ disease, affecting different age groups 
differently and requiring a comprehensive approach for best outcomes. The clinical expertise required is 
often lacking even among specialised medical professionals and is poorly understood by health planners 
resulting in “wasting” money and most importantly poor patient outcomes. 
In addition to these challenges the social determinants of health and their role in service implementation must 
be understood and addressed.  Housing, employment, family income, education, culture and religion (both so 
influential in disease prevention). In chronic disease, the availability or lack of health coverage and thus the 
threat of financial hardship, even bankruptcy, is an additional very important factor threatening both social and 
mental health. There is no doubt that economic hardship is correlated to poor health, poverty is the biggest 
enemy of health.  
INTRODUCTION 
8 
As an umbrella organization TIF provides its members with the tools to promote their needs including: 
 
 
 
It is easy to assume that robust and well-financed health systems necessarily provide optimal care. When a 
chronic condition is rare and even more when a hereditary condition is not part of the local population’s pattern 
of disease, then weaknesses are experienced.  In the countries of the Americas and of Europe north of the 
Mediterranean coast, migrations both historical and recent have introduced haemoglobin disorders to a 
varying extent, even though they are still rare [14]. Although population movements have been a phenomenon 
known throughout history, the recent increase of population shifts from South to North and East to West, have 
brought with them an increase in these chronic diseases which are over and above the general acute health 
issues that are expected. Migrations from Iraq, Thailand, Syria, Afghanistan and Turkey, for example are 
entering Europe from the Eastern borders of Greece and the Balkans; many are carriers of thalassaemia 
genes and HbE. One example is that of Germany where in 2014 only about 1,000-1,500 sickle cell patients 
were recorded [15], while in 2016 a neonatal screening study revealed a frequency of SCD of one in 2385 
newborns, probably of Sub-Saharan ancestry [16]. 
The clinical experience in these settings is often lacking and even diagnosis may be delayed or inaccurate. 
Specialised clinical care may be provided in selected centres, but most migrants are scattered and often do not 
know where to seek expert help, while on the other hand local physicians provide basic blood transfusions but 
with no expertise in management as recommended in International Guidelines (Guidelines for the Management 
of Transfusion-Dependent Thalassaemia, TIF, 2021). Language and cultural difficulties, the concerns about 
HIGH RESOURCE COUNTRIES WHERE THE THALASSAEMIAS 
ARE RARE IN THE INDIGENOUS POPULATION 
• 
Advocacy through capacity building workshops but also supports national groups by participating 
in visits to health authorities and bodies at national, regional and international level when 
requested. 
• 
Education programmes addressed to both professionals and patients through publications, 
fellowships, organization of events and in more current years through tele-medicine, webinars 
and electronic platforms (TIF e-Academy).  
• 
The establishment of “expert” patient groups and/or better patient advocacy groups to provide in 
a documented and evidence-based way the “patient’s perspective” and unmet needs to decision 
makers at all levels. 
• 
The creation of national and international advisory panels 
• 
Developing and maintaining epidemiological tools such as registries, electronic medical records 
and keeping its own epidemiological database with information both from the published literature 
and its contact with countries and member groups 
• 
Promoting self-management for patients, including the development of Mobile Apps 
• 
Working with WHO at both central, regional and country levels to influence and educate 
governments to promote and/or strengthen disease-specific policies 
• 
Encouraging research into more affordable and sustainable monitoring and other interventions. 
An example is the early detection of organ iron toxicity with alternative measures where MRI is not 
available. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
9 
housing and employment all lead to the patient taking second place even within the family. There is absence of 
national registries so that the issue may not be ‘visible’ to health authorities and since patient numbers and 
location are not known, planning of services is absent or insufficient to meet the needs. 
 
REFUGEES TO OTHER HIGH PREVALENCE AREAS 
The flow of refugees from war zones to neighbouring countries, which have also a high burden of these 
disorders remains of utmost concern for TIF. Protracted emergencies have created a great humanitarian crisis. 
Many patients from Syria have gone to Lebanon, which hosts around 1.5 million Syrian refugees (UNHCR, 
2024) while Jordan has received around 730,000 (UNHCR, 2024) and Egypt about 159,000 (UNHCR, 2024). 
These are countries, which have an indigenous haemoglobinopathy problem, a burden with which they are 
hardly coping for their own population. Yet little knowledge exists about the fate of the refugee patients in these 
countries. Who is responsible for their care is not really known while at the same time war conflicts may change 
from one day to another and humanitarian organisations need to be alert to redirect or revisit their activities 
and programmes. 
 
THE GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW  
The Global Thalassaemia Review was put together by TIF as a collection of independent reports, to document 
the existing situation across the world in the context of the various components of public health, clinical and 
social services which are deemed essential for patient wellbeing. The main concern in the Review is the 
transfusion dependent patient who demands the most services in terms of quantity and quality and for whom 
TIF has gathered through the years of its work the most in number and redistributing data or information. All 
patients with other haemoglobin disorders and congenital anaemias are also expected to benefit and their well-
being and quality of life are considered in the daily agenda of TIF, since they usually share the same 
haematology services but for whom however and data are also confined. The focus is on the historical 
conventional treatments for thalassaemia in the dawn of an era when innovative therapies are emerging. If 
conventional therapy is not reaching the majority, innovative therapies, however successful, will only increase 
inequalities. 
 
 
 
• 
The preparation of the individual chapters in this Review, by different authors, means that it is 
anticipated that there will be overlap in subject matter and information. However, this is accepted 
since the message of inequality and the need for more efforts to overcome deficiencies is the same 
and at the core of this Global Review. It was also necessary for each author to provide some form 
of introduction and basis for his/her comments in the content, part of which may appear in a 
similar way and style in other chapters. 
• 
The way the chapters were written is quite descriptive and each one of them can form a separate, 
complete topic on its own. Due to severe lack of published information, statistical analysis of data 
is very limited in this Review. The objective however was to bring to light deficiencies which are 
documented and easily discernible in terms of poor patient outcomes. 
INTRODUCTION 
10 
The main components that contribute to the effective control of thalassaemia have been almost exhaustively 
covered in this review including: prevention, blood transfusion services, iron load monitoring and iron chelation 
treatment services, the value of multidisciplinary care and expert centres in the management of haemoglobin 
disorders, social and disability needs,  very importantly the cost of disease and disease burden and last but not 
least, the value and role of national registries and patient engagement. 
This Global Review was completed by a compilation and analysis of the available information at TIF and/or from 
published information in the literature and focused on the description of disease related services and other 
related significant components mainly drawn from demographic data. There was an attempt by the authors to 
describe the services not only at regional level, but also at country level.  
Heterogeneity and inequality in patients accessing appropriate services for their needs are what this Review is 
addressing and for which TIF has meticulously worked through the years. 
For most chapters, attempts were made by the authors to provide even a gross assessment of the availability 
of disease specific services and to grade their effectiveness Acknowledging the fact that TIF’s intentions are to 
publish each chapter separately in a later point in time, it is anticipated as previously mentioned that the reader 
will encounter some degree of content overlap particularly in the introduction, discussions and conclusions 
sections of some of the chapters. 
TIF deeply and sincerely apologizes in advance for any omission or misinterpretation may have occurred 
with regards to assessing individual country’s services.  Lack of nationwide registries, patient health 
records and published information in literature will have contributed to such issues. Apart from the very 
valuable insights regarding services, this Review brings also to the forefront the substantial value of publishing 
information and sharing experiences and best practices amongst involved stakeholders – governments, 
competent authorities, heath care professionals, patients, academia, industry and indeed this is an element 
significantly lacking in the field of heamoglobin disorders.  
THIS REVIEW IS CONSIDERED BY TIF AS A DYNAMIC ACTIVITY AIMING TO BE UPDATED ANNUALLY, AS NEW 
AND RELIABLE INFORMATION BECOMES AVAILABLE TO TIF OR TO THE PUBLISHED LITERATURE. 
 
CONCLUSION 
The problem of inequality in healthcare provision is almost universal and well known, but TIF has decided to 
focus and record its experience with thalassaemia patients across the world. The data gathered, even from peer 
reviewed publications concern local or regional data and not national ones is often of questionable accuracy. 
Yet, the attempt to give as clear a picture as possible, not only of the global situation but also of each country, 
may offer some insights into the priorities that need to be tackled and policies to pursue. Passively accepting 
morbidity and mortality in young people cannot be acceptable particularly when regarding a condition/disorder 
for which there is ample knowledge and documented expertise for decades now on how to effectively prevent 
and appropriately treat. Authorities and decision makers must be sensitized and made aware that survival of 
the fittest or the richest cannot remain silent realities which no one wishes to acknowledge. 
Above all, this collection of facts and approximations is meant to guide TIF in its own pursuit of answers and 
guidance as to what can be practically done to allow a section of the community who can benefit from what 
medical science has to offer and live a life that is guaranteed by international proclamations.  The whole 
philosophy is that ‘we can do better’.  TIF is a firm believer in this philosophy and passionately fights for the 
patient voice to be heard and the despair of many to become an element of the past; in this effort, one 
organisation cannot change the world. International bodies like WHO, governments, health planners, 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
11 
economists, the academia, the industry, the patient support organizations at local, national and regional level, 
must all join hands and minds to bring about change.  
TIF is very grateful to the WHO for its long-term invaluable guidance and productive collaboration in the context 
of its work as ‘an NGO in official relations’ with the WHO. This Global Review is a deliverable of its 3-year plans 
of collaboration 2018-2020, 2021 – 2023, and 2024 - 2026. 
The findings of this Review will support TIF in sensitizing governments and competent authorities on their 
responsibility towards adopting and implementing the recommendations provided in the context of the WHO 
decisions on thalassaemia and other heamoglobin disorders with regards to the control of these disorders. 
TIF in addition, acknowledges and is greatly indebted to the scientists/health care professionals at country and 
international level who have been working and collaborating for decades with TIF through its educational 
programme across the six WHO Regions of the world. TIF also expresses through this Review, its deep 
appreciation to the medical societies for their close and productive collaboration in relevant projects including, 
mainly but not confined to, the European Hematology Association (EHA) and to other than thalassaemia 
disease-oriented NGOs. Last and most importantly, TIF is grateful to every individual patient and parent who 
mainly but also on an individual basis through their national patient organizations’ work, and share with TIF 
their challenges, concerns, successes, weaknesses and strengths making it possible through their trust and 
confidence to TIF and through their active and meaningful involvement and engagement at the decision-
making level in their countries, for TIF to continually advocate and fight for the improvements in disease specific 
policies at the national level but also of its own services towards the patients it represents all over the world. 
 
 
 
 
“Violating human and patients’ 
rights for equal access of patients to 
quality health and other care is not 
acceptable” 
Thalassaemia International 
Federation 
“
”
“We do not live to be treated. We are 
treated to live” 
G. Constantinou 
Expert Patient 
“
”
INTRODUCTION 
12 
REFERENCES 
1. Origa R. β-Thalassemia. Genet Med. 2017 Jun; 
19(6):609-619. doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.173. PMID: 
27811859. 
2. Origa R in 2021 Guidelines for the Management 
of Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (TDT), 
Cappellini, M.D. Porter, J. Taher, A. Editors. Chapter 
1. Thalassaemia International Federation. 4th 
edition. 
3. 
Weatherall 
DJ. 
The 
challenge 
of 
haemoglobinopathies in resource-poor countries. 
Br 
J 
Haematol. 
2011; 
154(6):736-44. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08742.x. PMID: 21726207. 
4. Viprakasit V, Gattermann N, Lee JW, Porter JB, 
Taher AT, Habr D, Martin N, Domokos G, Cappellini 
MD. Geographical variations in current clinical 
practice on transfusions and iron chelation therapy 
across various transfusion-dependent anaemias. 
Blood Transfus. 
2013 
Jan;11(1):108-22. 
doi: 
10.2450/2012.0012-12. PMID: 22871821. 
5. Strocchio L, Locatelli F. Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Transplantation in Thalassemia. Hematol Oncol 
Clin North Am. 2018 Apr;32(2):317-328. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2017.11.011. PMID: 29458734. 
6. Cappellini MD, Motta I. New therapeutic targets 
in 
transfusion-dependent 
and 
-independent 
thalassemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ 
Program. 
2017 
Dec 
8;2017(1):278-283. 
doi: 
10.1182/asheducation-2017.1.278. 
PMID: 
29222267; PMCID: PMC6142569. 
7. Cappellini MD, Porter JB, Viprakasit V, Taher AT. A 
paradigm shift on beta-thalassaemia treatment: 
How will we manage this old disease with new 
therapies? Blood Rev. 2018 Jul;32(4):300-311. doi: 
10.1016/j.blre.2018.02.001.PMID: 29455932. 
8. World Development Report 1993: Investing in 
Health. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/109
86/5976  
9. Jamison DT, Summers LH, Chang AY, Karlsson O, 
Mao W, Norheim OF, Ogbuoji O, Schäferhoff M, 
Watkins D, Adeyi O, Alleyne G, Alwan A, et al. 
Global health 2050: the path to halving premature 
death 
by 
mid-century. 
Lancet. 
2024 
Oct 
19;404(10462):1561-1614. 
doi: 
10.1016/S0140-
6736(24)01439-9. 
10. Arcaya MC, Arcaya AL, Subramanian SV. 
Inequalities in health: definitions, concepts, and 
theories. Glob Health Action. 2015 Jun 24;8:27106. 
doi: 10.3402/gha.v8.27106. PMID: 26112142. 
11. Marmot M. Social justice, epidemiology and 
health 
inequalities. 
Eur 
J 
Epidemiol. 
2017 
Jul;32(7):537-546. doi: 10.1007/s10654-017-0286-3. 
PMID: 28776115. 
12. Pearce A, Dundas R, Whitehead M, Taylor-
Robinson D. Pathways to inequalities in child 
health. Arch Dis Child. 2019 Oct;104(10):998-1003. 
doi: 
10.1136/archdischild-2018-314808. 
PMID: 
30798258. 
13. Modell B, Kuliev A. The history of community 
genetics: the contribution of the haemoglobin 
disorders. Community Genet. 1998; 1(1):3-11. doi: 
10.1159/000016129. PMID: 15178981. 
14. Aguilar Martinez P, Angastiniotis M, Eleftheriou 
A, Gulbis B, Mañú Pereira Mdel M, Petrova-
Benedict R, Corrons JL. Haemoglobinopathies in 
Europe: health & migration policy perspectives. 
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Jul 1;9:97. doi: 
10.1186/1750-1172-9-97 
15. Eber S, Dickeroff R. Anemia and haemoglobin 
diseases in patients with migration background. 
Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014; 139(9): 434-40 
16. Grosse R, Lukacs Z, Cobos PN, Oyen F, ET AL. 
The prevalence of Sickle cell disease and its 
implication for newborn screening in Germany 
(Hamburg Metropolitan Area). Pediatr Blood 
Cancer. 2016; 63(1): 168-70 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
13 
 
 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
14 
2. THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY 
THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., & Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) adopts and advocates the position of the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) that a genetic control programme should be an intrinsic part of national healthcare 
systems, encompassing the components of prevention, clinical management and social care. 
TIF, in this chapter, revisits the thalassaemia prevention programmes, strategies, policies which exist in a 
selection of its member countries. It discusses their effectiveness and whether any changes in policy or public 
attitudes to thalassaemia prevention have occurred through the years, in view of the significant improvements 
in patient outcomes, public health (including prevention of communicable diseases) and healthcare systems. 
 
Haemoglobin disorders are a group of hereditary anaemias which, without lifelong optimum care, are fatal, 
often in early childhood. In high prevalence regions of the world, they constitute a serious medical and public 
health problem. In a zone ranging from the Mediterranean basin to China, as well as Africa, these conditions 
are prevalent in the indigenous populations. However, migrations over the years have introduced them to many 
parts of the world, especially to western countries [1]. Patients receive varying levels of care, according to 
national policies and priorities. Optimal care is defined as the application of clinical and laboratory approaches 
that are validated at a given period of time and have proven outcomes, and which may change as new practices 
are adopted. 
Over the years, advances in clinical care of thalassaemia have changed the prospect for survival and quality of 
life [2,3]. The accumulation of experience and knowledge, particularly in the Southern Mediterranean countries 
over the last 2-3 decades, have led to the publication, initially by the WHO (in 1993) and later by TIF and others, 
of guidelines for both management (latest edition in 2021) [4] and prevention [5] of thalassaemia. Guidelines 
for the prevention of thalassaemia are based on elements identified in the 1970s as applied mainly by the 
countries of the Southern Mediterranean. These were supported by the WHO and its expert medical groups 
that were established in the 1980s and which led to the resolution on prevention published by WHO [6, 7]. 
Prevention programmes were initiated at a time when basic treatment was being increasingly adopted in the 
An effort will be made to answer the questions: 
• 
Have a) the improved prognosis (mainly due to the increasing use of oral chelating agents), b) the 
improvement of iron load monitoring [15], c) the provision of multidisciplinary care, and d) the recent 
availability of new innovative therapeutic and curative products [16] influenced public health decision-
makers and/or the attitude of the public at large with respect to prevention of thalassaemia? 
• 
Are public awareness, screening, genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis still recognised and 
considered essential components of an effective prevention programme? 
• 
Are these principles, and the essential elements of national coordination and funding, which aim at the 
reduction of birth incidence, still regarded as the main pillars of an effective prevention programme 
and is the possibility of an increasing birth incidence in countries where optimal care is available a real 
one? 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
15 
early 1970s and concerns about resources such as availability of blood for transfusion were predominant in the 
planning of services. The value of effective prevention programmes has been significantly appreciated in these 
countries since they have allowed, mainly through the reallocation of resources, the survival and quality of life 
of patients to improve. In developing countries, however, where more than 75% of the patient population is 
born and lives, optimum care cannot be, and is not, provided. Therefore, improving the effectiveness of 
prevention programmes constitutes the most important element that would contribute to great 
improvements, given that only a very small percentage of patients (TIF estimates this is less than 10% of the 
global patient community) in these countries has access to what is today referred to as optimal care. 
 
HISTORICAL ASPECTS AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
Steps towards better management historically date back to the 1960s when blood transfusion became 
increasingly used [8], and iron chelation was recognised as an essential component of treatment [9]. Over the 
ensuing years these basic modalities of care have been optimised, and new oral iron chelating agents have been 
introduced. Increased survival led to the recognition of multi-organ damage due to transfusional iron overload 
and toxicity, and the need for a multi-disciplinary approach to clinical management. In addition, psychosocial 
aspects were recognised, and community support was introduced. This escalating complexity of patient care 
required increasing resources and demands on healthcare systems. Reducing birth incidence as a means of 
reducing the public health impact and persuading health authorities to provide optimal care to patients as a 
means of ultimately saving resources, became imperative. The lack of precise epidemiological data in many 
countries has not allowed the development of appropriate health policies and actions. 
The importance of comprehensive control programmes was recognized as early as the 1950s when Silvestroni 
and Bianco in Italy, recommended to the High Commission for Hygiene and Health in 1955 the provision of free 
medical care for patients and the establishment of large-scale screening and preventive counselling 
programmes [10]. Lack of public and healthcare professional awareness was a limiting factor, along with the 
fact that only counselling for “at-risk” carrier couples was available at the time. However, the dreadful clinical 
picture experienced in these early years, the uncertain prognosis and the projection of an ever-increasing 
number of new cases as life expectancy was improving with better care, led health authorities and medical 
specialists to adopt and implement a programme for the prevention of newly affected births in some high 
prevalence countries. This gave “at-risk” couples the option of avoiding an affected birth. 
The first attempts at large scale and national prevention were adopted by some Italian provinces, Greece and 
Cyprus from the 1970s [11,12, 13,14]. These have served as models for other high prevalence countries, to 
formulate their own programmes. Later, prenatal diagnosis was introduced and became an additional choice 
for couples [15].  
Support for these programmes also came from the WHO, which formed a Working Group in the 1980s. 
 
In one of the WHO working group first meetings it was stated: 
“A genetic control programme is an integral strategy combining the best possible patient care with 
prevention through carrier screening, genetic counselling and the availability of prenatal diagnosis” [14]. 
Further to this, according to WHO Executive Board decision (EB118.R1) in May 2006, Member States are 
urged to “design, implement, and reinforce in a systematic and effective manner, comprehensive 
national, integrated programmes for prevention and management of thalassaemia, including 
information and screening. Such programmes being tailored to specific socioeconomic and cultural 
contexts aimed at reducing incidence, morbidity and mortality”. 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
16 
These prevention programmes were developed in accordance with fundamental principles of genetic 
counselling [17,18] i.e. the autonomy of the individual or couple, the right to complete information, and strict 
confidentiality.  Following these principles, couples were enabled to make ’informed choices’ concerning 
marriage and reproduction, according to the information provided by the professional(s) offering counselling. 
For all the above reasons, voluntary avoidance of new births affected by thalassaemia has been gradually 
encompassed in several national thalassaemia policies.  
In this Chapter, a survey of practices in various countries and an investigation to identify any changes that have 
occurred through the years, in policy or public attitudes to thalassaemia prevention given the improvement in 
patient outcomes seen in recent years, is undertaken. The possibility of an increase in birth incidence of affected 
births due to the free choice of parents in countries where optimal care is available has already been 
experienced in a few countries. Indeed, currently, because of the implementation of complex but 
comprehensive clinical management, which now includes early detection and effective management of 
complications, patients are surviving into the 7th decade [19, 20, 21]. These good outcomes hold true however, 
in high income settings but are variably achieved in several middle- and low-income countries. The need to 
control birth incidence by offering a prevention programme is still, for these reasons, necessary in countries in 
which premature death of patients is the prominent clinical outcome. 
 
PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
The free and informed choice of “at-risk” couples is the guiding principle of any programme of control presented 
to an “at-risk” population, including the provision of adequate and accurate information. Community 
awareness, and the quality of genetic counselling also have a significant impact on parental choices. All “at-risk” 
couples are presented with the same choices in premarital and preconception screening and need the 
appropriate counselling in order to proceed to their own ‘informed’ decisions (Table 1). These are significant 
elements affecting the choice of partner, marriage and in creating a family. Therefore, planning a service 
requires that these considerations are effectively addressed, in nationally coordinated, supported and funded 
strategies. 
Table 1. Choices available for couples who are at-risk 
 
 
 
Risk identified 
Choices 
Before marriage or 
pregnancy 
1. To avoid marrying another carrier 
2. To separate from a relationship that puts their future children at-risk  
3. To marry their chosen partner, with knowledge of the risk involved 
After marriage or 
cohabitation 
1. To proceed with a pregnancy, accepting the risk of possibly bearing an affected child 
2. To avoid having children (e.g., choosing adoption) 
3. To undergo prenatal diagnosis, choosing to either accept an affected child or 
interrupt the pregnancy  
4. To use pre-implantation genetic diagnosis as an alternative to prenatal diagnosis, 
and so avoid pregnancy interruption 
When already 
pregnant 
1. To undergo prenatal diagnosis (if in early pregnancy) 
2. To accept any outcome with no further action 
3. To interrupt the current pregnancy with no further action 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
17 
In cases where prevention policies for thalassaemia have been implemented, those which have demonstrated 
success and effectiveness include mainly the following key components: 
 
The difficult choices faced by “at-risk” couples, make the quality of information and counselling expertise 
provided of the utmost importance and this, unfortunately, falls below expectation in many settings [22]. 
Cultural differences across the world have resulted in a variety of practices, which must be taken into account 
[23] and understood when practical policies are to be decided, and ethical considerations are discussed. 
Consanguineous marriage is common in most countries of the Middle East, where the β-thalassaemia carrier 
rate is also high. Interruption of pregnancy has a variable acceptance across many cultures and individual 
couples may even differ among themselves. The acceptance of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) over 
prenatal diagnosis and the possible interruption of pregnancy, for example, in many settings has had limited 
utilisation due to cost and complexity. If non-invasive pre-natal diagnosis becomes feasible it may also have a 
poor uptake across the world because of the continuing need for pregnancy interruption. All these factors 
suggest the conclusion: a single policy on prevention cannot be universally accepted in view of the diversity of 
cultures, services offered and the patient clinical outcomes that are experienced in various settings. 
The thalassaemia patient journey in each setting is a factor that influences public responses to prevention. To 
date, limited information exists on the quality of care across the world, and even less on patient outcomes, 
including both morbidity and mortality, especially in developing countries. This requires the establishment of 
national patient registries [24], which in fact very few countries keep (for more information see Chapter on 
Registries). 
The adoption of programmes aimed at the reduction of birth incidence cannot be an isolated policy. It must, at 
the same time address the unmet needs of patients, who now, with good quality care, have the chance to return 
any investment in their care by becoming productive members of society. When considering the reduction of 
new affected births as a policy, the element of autonomy of the couple is vital and is based on ‘informed choice’, 
which depends on accurate unbiased information [25]. The extent to which this is adhered to cannot be 
quantified when looking at an overview of national policies. The objective of such policies is not always clearly 
stated by health planners but ultimately, they offer the chance for reduction of affected births. How this is 
achieved, the contribution of carrier screening, the acceptability of pregnancy interruption and other measures, 
will vary from country to country and from culture to culture. The efficacy of the prevention programmes is 
most often evaluated by the reduction of affected births. However, control of a disease is ultimately a reduction 
in suffering, so the improvement of the lives of affected patients and family outcomes must be the ultimate 
goals. 
Patient care leaves much to be desired in most of the world (for more information see other relevant Chapters). 
Moreover, new therapies are emerging, which due to cost, are anticipated to only reach a minority of patients 
in the developing world. Moreover, universal health coverage has yet to reach most of the global population. 
Collectively, these facts demonstrate a picture of inequity in care. Hence, policies for the reduction of affected 
births cannot be considered an outdated philosophy.  
• 
National strategy on prevention which suggests government approval, control and 
• 
support 
• 
Public awareness programme 
• 
Screening programme to identify carriers 
• 
Genetic counselling services 
• 
Prenatal diagnosis as a choice for at-risk couples 
• 
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis 
• 
New emerging technologies (such as non-invasive prenatal diagnosis) 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
18 
Each society initiating a genetic prevention programme must consider the above arguments and include its 
own ethical considerations.  In Vietnam for example one ethicist considered the need to differentiate genetic 
screening from the moral objections commonly associated with eugenics on the basis of the primary motive for 
screening (avoidance of suffering) and the preservation of voluntary choice. He concluded that beta 
thalassemia screening in Vietnam would hold up the ethical principle of nonmaleficence and also preserve and 
enhance reproductive choice [26]. In other societies voluntary choice is at risk by strong counselling against 
‘unsafe marriage’ [27]. Such considerations cannot be ignored by any society. 
 
PUBLIC AWARENESS 
One aspect that is a major factor in any public health policy is the adequate preparation of the public through 
an effective education and awareness raising policy [28].  The real impact of this is difficult to adequately assess, 
since there may be policies and actions in place, but whether they reach the public effectively can only be 
assessed through research using questionnaires. 
In Qatar a survey of 476 of university students (mostly female) found that only 100 had heard of the premarital 
screening programme.  Only 178 participants were willing to cancel marriages, given incompatible results. In 
Qatar, mandatory premarital screening was initiated in 2009 [29]. Likewise in Bangladesh over two-thirds (67%) 
of college students had never heard of thalassaemia even though most of the respondents (88%) showed a 
positive attitude towards ‘premarital’ screening to prevent thalassaemia [30]. The same ignorance was found 
following interviews with parents of thalassaemic children in which nearly all respondents (97%) had not heard 
about the term ‘thalassemia’ before the disease was diagnosed in their children; all (100%) were unscreened for 
carrier status prior to marriage [31]. The importance of a health education program on thalassemia prevention 
and control was demonstrated in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, where knowledge and attitude towards prevention 
and control of severe thalassaemias as well as the intention to undergo screening, was significantly improved 
compared to those who did not benefit from an education programme [32]. It is important to increase 
community understanding of thalassaemia and its prevention, and an important target group are the young 
who are approaching marriageable age. In Indonesia unaffected youth aged 15-24 years, were found to have 
poor knowledge (62.1%) of thalassaemia, through a relevant questionnaire. Many (82.6%) believed they were 
not carrying thalassaemia trait despite the fact that most (95.7%) had never been tested [33]. Another 
important consideration is the presence of migrants who may be unaware or have little knowledge of 
thalassaemia. This was demonstrated in Thailand where migrants from neighbouring countries (Myanmar and 
Cambodia) had extremely poor thalassaemia awareness (4.1%) compared to Thai subjects (79.6%), concluding 
that the knowledge gap in migrants needs urgent attention and sociocultural and structural barriers merit 
further attention when designing thalassaemia screening [33]. 
An additional problem is the inadequacy/ineffectiveness of screening programmes in many LMICs resulting in 
a high prevalence of undiagnosed haemoglobinopathy carriers among pregnant women attending antenatal 
clinics. Among 2107 pregnant women at 11 ± 3 weeks of gestation registering for antenatal care (ANC) at four 
government hospitals in Pune city, India, the prevalence of undiagnosed haemoglobinopathy carriers was 6.3% 
(3.3% β-thalassaemia, 1.7% AS and HbE carriers was 1.4%). The beta thalassaemia carriers belonged to the 
underprivileged social groups and part of the reason is that in light of the magnitude of nutritional anaemia 
among pregnant women in India, haemoglobinopathies are underprioritized as issues of public health concern 
[35]. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
19 
 
This lack of awareness constitutes a lack of communication and ineffectiveness of the policies adopted (or not 
effectively implemented) to reach the wider society and are witnessed across the world. In many cultures a fear 
of stigmatisation (often underplayed as a factor) plays a large part in the decision to be screened; the reason 
may be a perceived compromise of being a good choice in the marriage ‘market’. This issue is ignored in health 
education campaigns and will take much time, even years, to overcome in some societies [39, 40].  
Lack of population awareness, cultural and religious factors, the element of stigmatisation and marriage 
practices all differ widely across the world and greatly influence the acceptance of genetic prevention. A 
dialogue with the public has been an essential component of programmes, such as the one practiced in Cyprus 
and other countries [41]. In prevention programmes it is important to understand why the participating 
population does not always share the expectations of those running the programme. One objective of health 
authorities is to reduce marriages between carriers though premarital screening and directive counselling 
which may not be acceptable to all. In a study in Iran [42], qualitative interviews were used to investigate why 
such couples married even after counselling; the result indicated that  inadequate or inaccurate information 
was given to some, but strong emotional attachment between couples, taking the test at the wrong time, 
family interference and family insistence on marriage, having seen cases with no problems, and specific 
thoughts and beliefs are other important reasons for marriage among couples with thalassemia minor in Iran. 
A similar study from the Jazan province of Saudi Arabia [43], revealed that more than half of the at risk couples 
rejected the premarital counselling advice because they believed that their marriage was their unavoidable 
destiny, about 30% of the attendees reported that disease complications were not well explained during the 
counselling, and 18.2% proceeded with the marriage because they thought the risk of transmitting the disease 
to their children was small and 5.2% proceeded with their marriage because they believed their children’s lives 
would not be affected by the disease. In Oman, another country of the Arab peninsula, the premarital screening 
and counselling program was introduced in 1999; of 159 participants in the screening programme, the response 
to positive results, showed that 23% cancelled their engagement, while 13.8% continued with marriage for 
either emotional or family reasons. On the other hand, 18.9% were undecided as an initial response to positive 
results. Cancelling a relationship is difficult even in cultures where marriages are arranged and often 
consanguineous [44]. Similarly in Yemen approximately half of respondents (50.79%-56.61%) tend to go ahead 
for marriage in case of positive results for inherited and infectious diseases respectively [45]. 
 
 
 
For example, in Oman [36] 36% of married participants in a survey who reported that they did not 
volunteer for a premarital test, gave ignorance as the reason, while another 13% did not know where to 
go for a test; among other reasons, 6% stated there was lack of knowledge of the partner’s status before 
marriage. Most, believed that a premarital test is necessary, but 30% were not in favour of taking it even 
though 50% agreed that the test should be made compulsory. The situation in Oman is mirrored in other 
countries. In Malaysia [37], in 70% of families in which a child with thalassaemia was born, neither parent 
was aware of their carrier status until their child's diagnosis, while in other cases they did not receive 
accurate information or support for prenatal diagnosis and option for pregnancy interruption. Of the 38 
parents interviewed, 20 (52.6%) indicated that they would terminate an affected pregnancy. Notably, 
52.2% of Muslims supported termination. Likewise, in Saudi Arabia [38], of 920 students, 445 (48%) had 
never heard of thalassaemia and despite the mandatory premarital testing for thalassaemia, only 50% of 
married students stated having heard of the disease. 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
20 
COUNSELLING 
Information to the public must be supplemented by individually informing the “at-risk” couple in a session, or 
even better in a series of counselling sessions. To offer as many ‘choices’ as possible, carrier detection should 
occur before conception; the timing of screening is thus of great importance [46]. In areas where thalassaemia 
is of low prevalence, reaching out to the “at-risk” population is difficult and screening in early pregnancy has 
been adopted. This however limits the choices of parents to either accept an affected child or proceed to 
prenatal diagnosis and thereafter to possible interruption of an affected pregnancy. The difficulties of conveying 
correct, reliable, updated and understandable information to couples was recognised early and not only in the 
case of haemoglobinopathy prevention [47]. 
One important question is the quality of counselling and who, with what qualification and/or prior training, 
offers the service. Rowley et al. [22] investigated the effects on programme efficiency, comparing if the 
counselling was offered by primary providers and tertiary providers. They used indicators such as (i) the 
proportion of β-thalassaemia births after counselling, (ii) the knowledge of both partners “at-risk” after 
counselling and (iii) whether the individual counselled brought his/her partner to be tested. The two groups 
differed only in the case of bringing the partner to be tested. The similarity in effectiveness however may be 
because the study was preceded by a training session, so that the primary group were made familiar with a 
‘counselling protocol’. In the real world, haemoglobinopathy counselling is not offered by professional tertiary, 
trained professionals. Especially in large, high-risk populations, such counsellors are scarce and usually 
concerned with rare hereditary conditions while haemoglobin disorders are left to clinic doctors, nurses and 
laboratory personnel who know the condition, but however are not trained in counselling. In some cultures, 
directive counselling is the norm. 
The situation in the early days of screening in Cyprus (1980), in an analysis of the causes of 55 children born with 
thalassaemia despite an ongoing screening campaign, indicated that parents were not advised to go for testing 
(49%), or neglected to be screened (13%), or were given wrong advice (13%, usually by an obstetrician), or 
presented late in pregnancy (16%); 9% were screening laboratory errors [48]. This is still the situation in many 
high prevalence countries across the world, where poor counselling, due to inexperience and/or lack of training 
is added to the challenges. 
In a recent publication (2018), there were only 7,000 professional and qualified genetic counsellors globally, and 
of these only 350 were in the high prevalence countries (mainly in Asia); these countries include a 1.6 billion 
population with countless genetic conditions and with annual anticipated thalassaemia and sickle cell disease 
births of around 25,000 and 20,000 respectively [49]. The possibility of having professional counsellors for 
haemoglobinopathy prevention is, therefore, very small.  
Counselling services that are based on internationally accepted principles are the reliable source of in-depth 
information for the “at-risk” couples and lead to real informed choices. The global lack of trained counsellors is 
a major obstacle to the provision of quality counselling, albeit this does not mean that genetic counsellors 
should always be employed. The professionals (doctors, nurses), social workers and others who do counsel in 
real life should be trained before being permitted to assist people in understanding the implications of their risk 
for genetic diseases and presenting them with choices. 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
21 
CULTURAL INFLUENCES 
Most Islamic countries, particularly in the Middle East, practice mandatory premarital screening. This is, to a 
great extent, due to the fact that pregnancy interruption is not allowed by civil law in some countries, even 
though according to religious law, expressed in various theological opinions (fatwas), termination is acceptable 
up to the first 100-120 days of pregnancy [50]. Premarital screening, for these reasons, is conducted with the 
aim of limiting marriages between carriers. Marriage restriction in these countries is not, however, supported 
by the social norms, which include customary cousin (consanguineous) and arranged marriages. However, 
mandatory premarital screening has been said to promote community awareness of haemoglobinopathies, 
which may in the long-term increase the efficacy of the programme [51]. Nonetheless, even where premarital 
screening is mandatory, marriage cancellation may be not acceptable to most [52] and counselling cannot 
easily overcome social and cultural influences [53]. Researchers in Saudi Arabia, having established that a 
proportion of the at-risk couples married in spite of ‘incompatible’ results, suggest strengthening of counselling, 
reinforced to ensure that the healthiest practices are adopted and include interventions to address the 
consanguineous marriage practice [54]. Anecdotally, some centres in KSA report marriage cancellation are 
getting more acceptable; in Medina for example 90% of carriers avoid marriage to other carriers and 0 SCD 
births have been recorded; in Riyadh the same experience is reported (virtual meeting with centres November 
2022). 
Consanguineous marriage is associated with a higher risk of having offspring with an autosomal recessive 
condition, if this is present in the family. The prevalence of congenital anomalies in the offspring of first cousin 
marriages (where they occur) is estimated to be 1.7 – 2.8% higher than the general population risk [55]. If 
evidence-based recommendations are to be the basis of community and individual counselling, then the social 
factors behind these traditions must also be considered, and the benefits weighed against the risks. Culturally 
sensitive advice in genetic prevention is imperative and the contribution of other academic disciplines, such as 
sociology and anthropology, as well as legal and religious input, help provide a more tailored approach to 
communication between the medical specialists and the general population. 
In some countries where consanguineous marriage is common, the possibility of cascade screening for 
biological relatives of patients with beta-Thalassaemia is being explored. One such programme is included in 
the Punjab thalassaemia prevention in Pakistan. At this stage there is low uptake of cascade screening, a 
‘decision support intervention for relatives’ has been developed to assist counselling families [56, 57]. Family 
screening has also been proposed in Indonesia. In a study from West Java, it was demonstrated that 42.7% of 
thalassemia carriers were identified from 8 extended families of the case index, much more than in the control 
group, which identified 10.6% thalassemia carriers from 12 extended families without a history of thalassemia. 
This demonstrates the efficiency of cascade or extended family screening [58].  
Particular sensitivity to cultural responses to prevention programmes is also important in countries with large 
immigrant communities. In the UK for example, cultural, social, and (to a lesser extent) religious factors were 
found to mitigate against the advantages of early screening, particularly within faith communities. Social 
stigma emerged as key to this process. In England thalassemia commonly affects people of Cypriot, Indian, 
Pakistani, Bangladeshi, and Chinese origin; in the UK, 80% of babies born with thalassemia have parents of 
Indian, Pakistani, or Bangladeshi ancestry. A study using mainly interviews and qualitative and mixed method 
analysis, helped to explain the ambivalence, and sometimes contradictions, demonstrating the complexity of 
views and experiences, the range of impacts associated with genetic screening, and the outward ripple effect 
of screening information to the extended family and wider community. The findings suggest that cultural and 
social sensitivity is important if the unintended harms of screening, particularly the social/psychological burden 
of value conflict—are to be adequately addressed and minimized [59]  
 
 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
22 
Health planners should also be aware of cultural change over time. One example is Cyprus, where premarital 
screening has been the choice of the services, the public and the Church, which wanted to limit the interruption 
of affected pregnancies by pursuing the timely detection of carrier couples. In the 21st century, civil weddings 
are increasing, and many couples cohabit and marry after the first, or even second, pregnancy, and these are 
significant cultural changes for Cyprus. So, there are new social issues which may make premarital testing less 
effective as a measure, and pre-conception screening the focus of public education. Likewise, in the Middle 
East, cousin marriage is decreasing with recent urbanisation [60, 61, 62]. 
 
AVAILABILITY AND IMPACT OF PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS 
Prenatal diagnosis leading to interruption of pregnancy is viewed with particular distaste, not only on religious 
grounds, but also by couples “at-risk” and families, whatever their cultural background [18]. Factors that made 
the interruption of pregnancy acceptable in some settings included the spectre of premature death of the child, 
the complexity, expense and risks of treatment, and the painful experience of a previous affected child. Modell 
et al. [63] showed that prenatal diagnosis was introduced on the basis of the collective informed choices of 
couples “at-risk”. In Cyprus, avoiding marriage to another carrier was rejected by 90% of the population as a 
means of prevention of thalassaemia, while prenatal diagnosis was immediately accepted [11]. A large majority 
accepted prenatal diagnosis also in Sardinia [64, 65] and Greece [12]. The effect of prenatal testing and 
interruption of affected pregnancies has been a basic factor in reducing affected birth incidence in the 
Mediterranean countries and others, such as Iran, where all aspects of prevention (including prenatal diagnosis) 
are implemented leading to an over 80% reduction in birth incidence [66] This is not always acceptable in other 
cultures, but it is noted that without this choice, avoiding carrier marriages may also not be acceptable. Prenatal 
diagnosis is available in several Islamic countries, but access seems to be limited; this includes Iraq (Kurdish), 
and Pakistan (Punjab) even though many couples face family opposition (20%) when they had to opt for 
termination [67]. Even though access is limited prenatal diagnosis is offered in Bangladesh with 232 cases 
reported [68]. In Guangzhou (Guangdong province of China), 1880 at risk couples were detected by screening 
and were offered prenatal diagnosis at 10–13 weeks’ gestation based on informed consent; of these 345 couples 
terminated the affected pregnancy indicating acceptability of this choice in this part of China [69]. Similar 
acceptability was reported by the Center for Prenatal Diagnosis of Fujian Provincial Maternal and Children's 
Hospital (Fuzhou, China), with couples at risk for both HbH disease and β-thalassaemia. Prenatal examinations 
included including chorionic villus samples, amniotic fluid samples (the majority) and umbilical cord blood 
samples. In Fuijan province, premarital, pregestational, and prenatal screening of thalassemia together with 
intensification of health education of thalassemia-related knowledge has been conducted in highly prevalent 
areas across the province, aiming to reduce the prevalence of thalassemia in newborns [70]. In India also 
prenatal diagnosis is acceptable and in the National Institute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai, over 30 years, 
3478 couples (first trimester: 2475; second trimester: 1003) from all over India were offered PND, and 801 
foetuses (23.0%) were affected and all except three couples opted for termination of these pregnancies [71]. 
Prenatal diagnosis is practiced in several centres in India [72].  
A study from Thailand confirmed that acceptance of PND in Thai pregnant women was not always associated 
with pregnancy termination. Multiple factors influenced the decision to terminate, but not their religious 
affiliation. Such factors include the outcomes of the disease in the child’s life and the attitudes of significant 
members of the family [73]. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
23 
In addition, preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) is available in several centres in China [74]. In China the 
feasibility of Non-invasive prenatal testing for thalassemia after carrier screening is now being investigated. It 
is acceptable for high-risk couples reluctant to undergo an invasive procedure, requiring only a simple blood 
draw from the pregnant woman; where NIPT detects an affected foetus or detects only one pathogenic allele 
(6 cases), invasive prenatal diagnosis is recommended. In one study, NIPT dramatically reduced the number of 
invasive prenatal diagnosis required by approximately 69.5% [75, 76]. 
 
CURRENT TRENDS 
These complex steps and difficult choices have led couples to question the need to avoid the birth of affected 
children, particularly with improved patient prognosis. This trend is currently limited but visible. Taking the 
example of Cyprus, where since the 1980s the birth of thalassaemia patients was reduced to 0-2 per year from 
an expected number of 50-70; in recent years up to 8 new cases per year have been seen (Fig.1 data from the 
Cyprus thalassaemia registry). 
 
Figure 1. Annual births of babies with β-thalassaemia major in Cyprus. (Source: Cyprus Thalassaemia Registry) 
When asked by journalists, one Cypriot couple responded that a child with thalassaemia can live to old age, so 
‘we have chosen to have our baby’.  This confidence in outcomes has also been experienced in Italy; in Sicily, the 
residual cases ‘were because of a conscious choice by expectant parents in relation to improved life expectancy 
as well as improved quality of life of the affected patients [77]. Other reasons for residual births exist of course, 
for example, the influx of migrant groups with cultural differences with perhaps a lack of appropriate and 
sufficient knowledge on the disease compared to the indigenous population, poor communication and 
counselling and laboratory errors [78]. In many countries’ ignorance, poor communication and poor laboratory 
standards are expected to be the more prominent reasons. 
 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Annual β-thalassaemia major births in Cyprus
Number of Births
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
24 
CONCLUSIONS 
Almost 50 years ago programmes were initiated in high prevalence countries, mainly in the Mediterranean 
basin, aiming to limit new affected births. These countries had in mind the need to reallocate resources to more 
effectively address the increasing needs for lifelong management of patients. Over the years, these needs have 
been largely satisfied in these countries, and this is reflected in the results related to patient outcomes. These 
may indeed not have been achieved if the thalassaemia birth incidence remained unchecked. 
Populations “at-risk” have made choices based on awareness programmes and the poor clinical picture, 
including early mortality of affected children and the difficulties faced by the families. Social determinants, such 
as having to still find paid blood donors or replacement donations (which remains the case in many countries) 
and to provide medications beyond the capacity of the family income were, and still are in many countries, 
important factors in the acknowledging the necessity of thalassaemia prevention programmes. 
Over the years, this situation has begun to change, but only in some very limited parts of the world where 
patient outcomes have indeed shown dramatic improvements. In many of the high prevalence countries of the 
world, however, conditions related to significantly improved patient outcomes have not substantially changed. 
As long as the burden of care for thalassaemia patients manifests as out-of-pocket expenses for families 
and is not supported by healthcare systems, inequalities and poor outcomes will continue to shape the 
global landscape of these conditions. 
The impact on the whole family in countries where universal health coverage is not effective, must not be 
underestimated. In a social study from a developing country [79] 42% of the surveyed families pay their own 
health expenses and nearly 80% are in debt. Such information on the plight of families is indeed the daily 
experience in the work of TIF. This is without considering other psychosocial effects, including isolation and 
stigmatisation. The socioeconomic consequences of chronic illnesses must always be at the forefront when 
health planning is being considered. 
Offering people in these countries the possibility to choose and even prevent the birth of affected children, 
therefore remains perhaps a less painful alternative to experiencing multiple medical complications and early 
death. For such countries, limiting new annual affected births remains a policy, which may be regarded as 
justified. The concept of eugenics, often cited as criticism of prevention of any genetic disease, cannot be 
sustained when the overall picture of severe and lifelong suffering is understood. When Galton first used this 
term [80], he had in mind the ‘the improvement of the inborn qualities or stock of the human population’. In 
medical genetics, the aim of hereditary disease prevention programmes is to offer and contribute to 
improvements in the lives of patients and their families [81]. 
In countries where the patient outcomes indicate the possibility of a long and good quality of life, the 
perspective on prevention has changed or has begun to change. Couples are now seeing adult patients, often 
professionals, and are asking why should their child not have the same fate? People are aware of new therapies, 
which may either cure or seriously reduce the need for blood transfusions and all the consequences that follow 
this dependency. Is the choice of ‘prevention’ still relevant in such settings? However, the added value of 
prevention cannot be ignored when weighed by policymakers in respect to ensuring the provision of quality 
care to existing patients and the competition for medical, public health and infrastructure resources, that the 
steadily and exponentially increasing numbers of affected children will entail, in the absence of prevention.  
Indeed, the increase in patient numbers goes hand-in-hand with increasing costs for treatment, that even in 
the developed high Human Development Index (HDI) countries of the world may not be sustainable.  Therefore, 
risk information and genetic counselling must still be available for people to make fully informed choices. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
25 
Public awareness policies, and their continual amendments to reflect societal perceptions, norms and other 
impacting factors (e.g. migration of populations) should continue to be pursued by national, regional and 
international professional, medical, scientific (e.g. haematology associations) organisations as well as health 
bodies (e.g. WHO) and patient support groups (e.g. TIF) in an effort to safeguard the welfare of patients across 
all countries, including importantly those where no policies are currently implemented and/or suboptimal 
services exist. In these cases, awareness can help in advocacy and motivational actions. 
It must be remembered that social changes will affect the application of prevention programmes. One example 
are the changing marriage patterns in some societies; there is divorce between marriage and reproduction, 
since couples may have children and marry later or not at all. The demise of church weddings and the increase 
in civil weddings in a country like Cyprus may affect screening since it was the Church that mandated premarital 
screening and not civil authorities. 
 
People at risk for genetic diseases like thalassaemia, in whichever healthcare environment they may live, 
will always be faced with challenges and painful choices in their reproductive lives, and the effort of every 
government to provide all available tools to support their decisions must continue. Their support by 
healthcare professionals and patient organisations at the national, regional and international levels, in 
addition to relevant official health bodies (mainly the WHO) is imperative to ensure informed decisions are 
made [78] 
 
In summary those responsible for developing national prevention programmes must consider the following: 
• Who to screen and when: schools, premarital, antenatal, family (consanguinity): these depend on 
population structure and immigrant/ethnic groups, gene frequencies, and cultural considerations. 
• Genetic counselling – trained doctors/nurses/laboratory scientists are the most likely counsellors in the 
absence of qualified genetic counsellors. In multicultural societies the linguistic and cultural barriers must 
be met. Offering choices considering culture and prognosis which are changing in all societies. 
• Prenatal diagnosis and termination of pregnancy are free choices but so is marriage cancellation. The 
autonomy of couples and individuals must be respected. 
• IVF/PGT are expensive choices which need to be financially supported by the programme. The limitations 
of these techniques must be explained in counselling. 
• Neonatal screening is suitable for sickle cell and other variants but less accurate in the detection of beta 
thalassaemia. Early diagnosis will help sickle cell disorders more than other syndromes. 
 
NEW APPROACHES  
Point of care devices: to detect thalassaemia carriers which allow for cheap screening. Such devices are now 
marketed for both sickle cell [83, 84] and thalassaemia [85] and are suitable for areas where laboratory and 
other services are generally limited.  
Next Generation Sequencing NGS: This is expected to be useful in multi-ethnic societies/populations in which 
a wide range of mutations and combinations complicate screening, with extreme heterogeneity of 
haemoglobinopathies. In classical phenotypic screening there are weaknesses in carrier testing since carriers 
who have normal or borderline red cell indices and/or HbA2 levels may be missed. [86, 87]. This high-throughput 
DNA sequencing technology reduces price, time, workflow complexity, and error rate and is being increasingly 
adopted in population wide screening.  
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
26 
Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis: a non-invasive test for haemoglobin disorders using fetal DNA in the 
maternal plasma, has the potential of avoiding invasive prenatal procedures and so reducing danger to the 
foetus. This technology has limitations and is not yet routinely used even though the use of NGS has the 
potential to improve diagnostic accuracy [88] 
Treating the foetus: from intrauterine transfusion to gene therapy. The use of intrauterine blood transfusion is 
particularly useful in the management of Hemoglobin Bart's hydrops fetalis syndrome; raising the total Hb in 
the affected foetus has the potential of stopping progression of heart failure in the foetus along with all its 
consequences to the pregnancy. Surviving foetuses will be transfusion dependent patients along with the 
accompanying complications [89]. Future approaches such as in –utero HSCT and genetic therapies may 
improve the outlook for this syndrome. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
27 
REFERENCES 
1. Aguilar Martinez P, Angastiniotis M, Eleftheriou 
A, et al. Haemoglobinopathies in Europe: health & 
migration policy perspectives. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 
2014;9:97. Published 2014 Jul 1. doi:10.1186/1750-
1172-9-97 
2. Voskaridou E, Kattamis A, Fragodimitri C, 
Kourakli 
A 
et 
al. 
National 
registry 
for 
hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Greece: 
updated 
demographics, current trends in affected births 
and causes of mortality. Ann Hematol. 2019; 
98(1):55-66 doi: 10.1007/s00277-018-3493-4 
3. Ansari-Moghaddam A, Adineh HA, Zareban I, 
Mohammadi M, Maghsoodlu M. The survival rate 
of patients with beta-thalassemia major and 
intermedia and its trends in recent years in Iran. 
Epidemiol 
Health. 
2018;40: 
e2018048. 
doi: 
10.4178/epih.e2018048. 
4. Farmakis D, Porter J, Taher A, Domenica 
Cappellini M, Angastiniotis M, Eleftheriou A. 2021 
Thalassaemia International Federation Guidelines 
for the Management of Transfusion-dependent 
Thalassemia. Hemasphere. 2022 Jul 29;6(8):e732. 
doi: 10.1097/HS9.0000000000000732. 
5. Old J, Angastiniotis M, Galanello R, Harteveld CL, 
Petrou M, Traeger-Synodinos J. Prevention of 
thalassaemias and other haemoglobinopathies. 
Vol 1: principles. 2nd edition. 2013. Thalassaemia 
International Federation (Publication 18). 
6. WHA59.20 Sickle-cell anaemia , 27 May 2006. 
https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA59/
A59_R20-en.pdf 
7. WHO EB118.R1 Thalassaemia and other 
haemoglobinopathies. 
11 
May 
2006. 
https://www.emro.who.int/images/stories/ncd/doc
uments/b118_r1-en1.pdf?ua=1  
8. 
Silvestroni 
E, 
Bianco 
I. 
Screening 
for 
microcytemia in Italy: analysis of data collected in 
the past 30 years. Am J Genet. 1975; 27: 198-212  
9. Sephton-Smith R. Iron excretion in thalassaemia 
major after administration of chelating agents. 
BMJ. 2: 1577   
10. Silvestroni E, Bianco I, Graziani B, Carboni C, 
D’Arca 
SU. 
First 
premarital 
screening 
of 
thalassaemia carriers in intermediate schools in 
Latium. J Med Genet. 1978; 15: 202-207 
11. Angastiniotis MA, Hadjiminas MG. Prevention 
of thalassaemia in Cyprus. Lancet. 1981; 14;1 
(8216):369-71. 
12. Loukopoulos D. Haemoglobinopathies in 
Greece: prevention programme over the past 35 
years. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Oct;134(4):572-6. 
13. Cao A, Galanello R, Melis MA, Ruggeri R, Addis 
M, Maccioni L, Paglietti, Our experience in 
screening and genetic counseling for beta-
thalassemia. Minerva Med. 1981 Mar 17;72(10):623-
8. 
14. Barrai I, Vullo C. Screening for beta-
thalassaemia 
heterozygotes. 
Lancet. 
1980; 
2(8206):1257. 
15. Fairweather DV, Modell B, Berdoukas V, Alter 
BP, Nathan DG, Loukopoulos D, Wood, W, Clegg JB, 
Weatherall DJ. Antenatal diagnosis of thalassaemia 
major. Br Med J. 1978; 1(6109):350-3. 
16. WHO; Geneva: 1994. Guidelines for the control 
of haemoglobin disorders. WHO/HDP/HB/GL/94.1. 
17. Fletcher JC, Berg K, Tranøy KE. Ethical aspects 
of medical genetics. A proposal for guidelines in 
genetic 
counseling, 
prenatal 
diagnosis 
and 
screening. Clin Genet. 1985; 27(2):199-205. 
18. Modell B. The ethics of prenatal diagnosis and 
genetic counselling. World Health Forum. 1990; 11: 
179-186. 
19. Borgna-Pignatti C(1), Rugolotto S, De Stefano 
P, Zhao H, Cappellini MD, Del Vecchio GC, Romeo 
MA, Forni GL, Gamberini MR, Ghilardi R, Piga A, 
Cnaan A. Survival and complications in patients 
with thalassemia major treated with transfusion 
and 
deferoxamine. 
Haematologica. 
2004; 
89(10):1187-93. 
20. Telfer P(1), Coen PG, Christou S, Hadjigavriel M, 
Kolnakou A, Pangalou E, Pavlides N, Psiloines M, 
Simamonian K, Skordos G, Sitarou M, Angastiniotis 
M. Survival of medically treated thalassemia 
patients in Cyprus. Trends and risk factors over the 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
28 
period 
1980-2004. 
Haematologica. 
2006; 
91(9):1187-92. 
21. Ladis V, Chouliaras G, Berdoukas V, et al. 
Survival in a large cohort of Greek patients with 
transfusion-dependent beta thalassaemia and 
mortality 
ratios 
compared 
to 
the 
general 
population. Eur J Haematol. 2011; 86(4):332-338. 
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01582.x 
22. Rowley PT, Loader S, Sutera CJ, Kozyra A. 
Prenatal genetic counseling for hemoglobinopathy 
carriers: a comparison of primary providers of 
prenatal care and professional genetic counselors. 
Am J Hum Genet. 1995; 56(3):769-76. 
23. Petrou M. Informed choice in a multi-cultural 
world. Thalassemia Reports. 2018; 8:7475  
24. Modell B, Khan M, Darlison M, et al. A national 
register for surveillance of inherited disorders: beta 
thalassaemia in the United Kingdom. Bull World 
Health Organ. 2001;79(11):1006-1013. 
25. Modell B. Ethical aspects of genetic prevention. 
Ann Med. 1992; 24: 549-555  
26. Mai-Tram Riquier. The ethics of genetic 
screening for beta thalassemia in Vietnam. Dev 
World 
Bioeth. 
2021 
May 
11. 
doi: 
10.1111/dewb.12316 
27. Rouh AlDeen N, Osman AA, Alhabashi MJ, Al 
Khaldi R, Alawadi H, Alromh MK, Alyafai EG, 
Akbulut-Jeradi N. The Prevalence of β-Thalassemia 
and 
Other 
Hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Kuwaiti 
Premarital 
Screening 
Program: 
An 
11-Year 
Experience. J Pers Med. 2021 Sep 29;11(10):980. 
doi: 10.3390/jpm11100980 
28. Ebrahim S, Raza AZ, Hussain M, Khan A, Kumari 
L, Rasheed R et al. Knowledge and Beliefs 
Regarding Thalassemia in an Urban Population. 
Cureus. 
2019; 
11(7):e5268. 
doi: 
10.7759/cureus.5268. 
29. Al-Shafai M, Al-Romaihi A, Al-Hajri N, Islam N, 
Adawi K. Knowledge and Perception of and 
Attitude toward a Premarital Screening Program in 
Qatar: A Cross-Sectional Study. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2022 Apr 6;19(7):4418. 
doi: 
10.3390/ijerph19074418.  
30. Hossain MS, Hasan MM, Raheem E, Islam MS, 
Al Mosabbir A, Petrou M, Telfer P, Siddiqee MH. 
Lack of knowledge and misperceptions about 
thalassaemia 
among 
college 
students 
in 
Bangladesh: a cross-sectional baseline study. 
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Feb 21;15(1):54. doi: 
10.1186/s13023-020-1323-y.  
31. Hossain MS, Mahbub Hasan M, Petrou M, Telfer 
P, Mosabbir AA. The parental perspective of 
thalassaemia in Bangladesh: lack of knowledge, 
regret, and barriers. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Jul 
16;16(1):315. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01947-6. 
32. Cheng K, Fucharoen S, Sanchaisuriya K, 
Fucharoen G, Sanchaisuriya P, Jetsrisuparb A. 
Effect of health education on severe thalassemia 
prevention and control in communities in 
Cambodia. Arch Public Health. 2018 Feb 19;76:13. 
Doi: 10.1186/s13690-018-0259-3. 
33. Wahidiyat PA, Yo EC, Wildani MM, Triatmono 
VR, Yosia M. Cross-sectional study on knowledge, 
attitude and practice towards thalassaemia among 
Indonesian youth. BMJ Open 2021;11:e054736. 
Doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-054736 
34. Xu JZ, Tanongsaksakul W, Suksangpleng T, 
Ekwattanakit S, Riolueang S, Telen MJ, Viprakasit 
V. Feasibility of and barriers to thalassemia 
screening in migrant populations: a cross-sectional 
study of Myanmar and Cambodian migrants in 
Thailand. 
BMC 
Public 
Health. 
2021 
Jun 
21;21(1):1177. Doi: 10.1186/s12889-021-11059-2. 
35. Dharmarajan S, Pawar A, Bhide P, Kar A. 
Undiagnosed 
haemoglobinopathies 
among 
pregnant women attending antenatal care clinics in 
Pune, 
India. 
J 
Community 
Genet. 
2021 
Jul;12(3):337-344. doi: 10.1007/s12687-021-00505-8 
36. Al-Farsi OA, Al-Farsi YM, Gupta I, Ouhtit A, Al-
Farsi KS, Al-Adawi S. A study on knowledge, 
attitude, and practice towards premarital carrier 
screening 
among 
adults 
attending 
primary 
healthcare centers in a region in Oman. BMC Public 
Health. 2014;14:380. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-
380. 
37. Ngim CF, Ibrahim H, Lai NM, Ng CS. A single 
centre study on birth of children with transfusion-
dependent thalassaemia in Malaysia and reasons 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
29 
for ineffective prevention. Prenat Diagn. 2015; 
35(1):51-9. doi: 10.1002/pd.4484. 
38. Olwi DI, Merdad LA, Ramadan EK. Thalassemia: 
a prevalent disease yet unknown term among 
college students in Saudi Arabia. J of Comm Genet 
(2018) 9:277–282 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12687-
017-0351-3 
39. Petrou M. Screening for beta thalassaemia. 
Indian J Human genet. 2010; 16(1): 1-5 doi: 
10.4103/0971-6866.64934 
40. Schmidt RM. Hemoglobinopathy screening: 
approaches 
to 
diagnosis, 
education 
and 
counselling. Am J Public Health 1974; 64(8): 799-
804 
41. Kyriakides T. The formation of the Cypriot 
Thalasasemia prevention system: the ‘slow’ 
assembly and construction of a problem (1944-
1984). J Hist Sociol. 2020; doi: 10.1111/johs.12270 
42. Hasanshahi F, Khanjani N. Investigating the 
reasons for marriage among couples with 
thalassemia minor, in Iran. J Community Genet. 
2021 Oct;12(4):507-513. doi: 10.1007/s12687-021-
00540-5. 
43. Gosadi IM, Gohal GA, Dalak AE, Alnami AA, 
Aljabri NA, Zurayyir AJ. Assessment of Factors 
Associated with the Effectiveness of Premarital 
Screening for Hemoglobinopathies in the South of 
Saudi Arabia. Int J Gen Med. 2021 Jun 30;14:3079-
3086. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S321046 
44. Al Zeedi MASA, Al Abri ZG. Attitudes and 
impact among people with abnormal premarital 
screening test results in Muscat governorate's 
primary healthcare centers in 2018. J Community 
Genet. 
2021 
Jan;12(1):163-169. 
doi: 
10.1007/s12687-020-00493-1. 
45. Almoliky MA, Abdulrhman H, Safe SH, Galal M, 
Abdu H, Towfiq B, Abdullah S, Waleed M, Sultan 
MA. Knowledge and attitude of Engaged and 
Recently Married Couples Toward Premarital 
Screening: A Cross-Sectional Study. Inquiry. 2022 
Jan-Dec;59:469580221097424. 
doi: 
10.1177/00469580221097424 
46. Weil LG, Charlton MR, Coppinger C, Daniel Y, 
Streetly A. Sickle cell disease and thalassaemia 
antenatal screening programme in England over 10 
years: a review from 2007/2008 to 2016/2017. J Clin 
Pathol. 2020;73(4):183-190. doi:10.1136/jclinpath-
2019-206317 
47. Loader S, Sutera CJ, Walden M, Kozyra A, 
Rowley 
PT. 
Prenatal 
screening 
for 
hemoglobinopathies II. Evaluation of counselling. 
Am J Human genet. 1991. 48: 447-451 
48. Angastiniotis M, Kyriakidou S, Hadjiminas M. 
The Cyprus Thalassemia Control Program. Birth 
Defects Orig Artic Ser. 1988;23(5B):417-32. PMID: 
3390571 
49. Ormond EK, Laurino MY, Barlow-Stewart K, 
Wessels TM, Macaulay S, Austin J. Genetic 
counselling globally: where are we now? Am J Med 
Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2018;178(1):98-107. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31607 
50. Al-Matary A, Ali J. Controversies and 
considerations regarding the termination of 
pregnancy for foetal anomalies in Islam. BMC Med 
Ethics. 2014;15:10.  doi:10.1186/1472-6939-15-10 
51. Alsaeed ES, Farhat GN, Assiri AM, Memish Z, 
Ahmed EM, Saeedi MY, Al-Dossary MF, Bashawri 
H. Distribution of hemoglobinopathy disorders in 
Saudi Arabia based on data from the premarital 
screening and genetic counseling program, 2011-
2015. J Epidemiol Glob Health. 2018; 7 Suppl 1:S41-
S47. doi:10.1016/j.jegh.2017.12.001. 
52. Alkhaldi SM, Khatatbeh MM, Berggren VE, Taha 
HA. Knowledge and Attitudes Toward Mandatory 
Premarital Screening Among University Students 
in North Jordan. Hemoglobin. 2016;40(2):118-24. 
doi: 10.3109/03630269.2015.1135159. 
53. Gosadi IM, Gohal GA, Dalak AE, Alnami AA, 
Aljabri NA, Zurayyir AJ. Assessment of Factors 
Associated with the Effectiveness of Premarital 
Screening for Hemoglobinopathies in the South of 
Saudi Arabia. Int J Gen Med. 2021 Jun 30;14:3079-
3086. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S321046. 
54. Al-Shroby WA, Sulimani SM, Alhurishi SA, Bin 
Dayel ME, Alsanie NA, Alhraiwil NJ. Awareness of 
Premarital Screening and Genetic Counseling 
among 
Saudis 
and 
its 
Association 
with 
Sociodemographic Factors: a National Study. J 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
30 
Multidiscip Healthc. 2021 Feb 17;14:389-399. doi: 
10.2147/JMDH.S296221 
55. Hamamy H, Antonarakis SE, Cavalli-Sforza LL, 
Temtamy S, Romeo G et al. Consanguineous 
marriages, pearls and perils: Geneva International 
Consanguinity Workshop Report. Genet Med. 
2011;13(9):841-7. 
doi: 
10.1097/GIM.0b013e318217477f 
56. Ahmed S, Jafri H, Rashid Y, Ehsan Y, Bashir S, 
Ahmed M. Cascade screening for beta-thalassemia 
in 
Pakistan: 
development, 
feasibility 
and 
acceptability of a decision support intervention for 
relatives. Eur J Hum Genet. 2022 Jan;30(1):73-80. 
doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00918-6.  
57. Ahmed S, Jafri H, Ahmed WN, Faran M, Rashid 
Y, Ehsan Y, Ahmed M. Healthcare professionals' 
perceptions of implementing a decision support 
intervention for cascade screening for beta-
thalassemia in Pakistan. Eur J Hum Genet. 2022 
Jul;30(7):795-799. doi: 10.1038/s41431-022-01074-1.  
58. Susanah S, Sari NM, Prihatni D, Sinaga P, 
Trisaputra JO, Rakhmilla LE, Sribudiani Y. Extended 
family thalassemia screening as a feasible 
alternative method to be implemented in 
identifying carriers in West Java, Indonesia. J 
Community Genet. 2022 Feb;13(1):103-112. doi: 
10.1007/s12687-021-00565-w.  
59. Boardman FK, Clark C, Jungkurth E, Young PJ. 
Social and cultural influences on genetic screening 
programme acceptability: A mixed-methods study 
of the views of adults, carriers, and family members 
living with thalassemia in the UK. J Genet Couns. 
2020 Dec;29(6):1026-1040. doi: 10.1002/jgc4.1231.  
60. Islam MM, Ababneh FM, Khan MHR. 
Consanguineous marriage in Jordan: an update. J 
Biosoc 
Sci. 
2018;50(4):573-578. 
doi:10.1017/S0021932017000372 
61. Hamamy H, Jamhawi L, Al-Darawsheh J, Ajlouni 
K. Consanguineous marriages in Jordan: why is the 
rate 
changing 
with 
time?. 
Clin 
Genet. 
2005;67(6):511-516. 
doi:10.1111/j.1399-
0004.2005.00426.x 
62. Na'amnih W, Romano-Zelekha O, Kabaha A, et 
al. Continuous decrease of consanguineous 
marriages among Arabs in Israel. Am J Hum Biol. 
2015;27(1):94-98. doi:10.1002/ajhb.22610 
63. Modell B, Ward RHT, Fairweather DVI. Effect of 
introducing 
antenatal 
diagnosis 
on 
the 
reproductive behaviour of families at risk for 
thalassaemia. Br Med J. 1980. 80(6228): 1347-50   
64. Corda V, Murgia F, Dessolis F, Murru S, 
Chervenak 
FA, 
McCullough 
LB, 
Monni G. 
Professionally responsible management of the 
ethical and social challenges of antenatal screening 
and diagnosis of β-thalassemia in a high-risk 
population. J Perinat Med. 2021 Mar 16;49(7):847-
852. doi: 10.1515/jpm-2021-0021. PMID: 33721919. 
65. Cao A, Rosatelli MC, Galanello R. Control of 
beta-thalassemia by carrier screening, genetic 
counselling and prenatal diagnosis; the Sardinian 
experience. CIBA Foundation Symp. 1996; 197: 137-
51; discussion 151-5 
66. Hadipour Dehshal M, Tabrizi Namini M, 
Ahmadvand 
A, 
Manshadi 
M, 
Sadeghian 
Varnosfaderani F, Abolghasemi H. Evaluation of 
the national prevention program in iran, 2007-
2009: the accomplishments and challenges with 
reflections on the path ahead. Hemoglobin. 2014; 
38(3):179-187. doi:10.3109/03630269.2014.893530 
67. Tariq, R. ., Mahmud, T., Bashir, S., Akhtar, S. & 
Israr, M. (2021). Impact Of Population Screening 
Programs On The Knowledge, Attitudes And 
Practices Regarding Prevention Of Thalassemia. 
Pakistan 
BioMedical 
Journal, 
4(2).https://doi.org/10.54393/pbmj.v4i2.103 
68. Aziz MA, Khan WA, Banu B, Das SA, Sadiya S, 
Begum S. Prenatal Diagnosis and Screening of 
Thalassemia Mutations in Bangladesh: Presence of 
Rare Mutations. Hemoglobin. 2020 Nov;44(6):397-
401. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2020.1830797.   
69. Jiang F, Zuo L, Li J, Chen G, Tang X, Zhou J, Qu 
Y, Li D, Liao C. Evaluation of intervention strategy 
of thalassemia for couples of childbearing ages in 
Centre of Southern China. J Clin Lab Anal. 2021 
Oct;35(10):e23990. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23990. 
70. Huang H, Chen M, Chen L, Zhang M, Wang Y, Lin 
N, Xu L. Prenatal diagnosis of thalassemia in 695 
pedigrees from southeastern China: a 10-year 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
31 
follow-up 
study. 
J 
Clin 
Lab 
Anal. 
2021 
Oct;35(10):e23982. doi: 10.1002/jcla.23982. 
71. Colah RB, Nadkarni AH, Gorakshakar AC, 
Sawant PM, Mehta PR, Gorivale MS, Hariharan P, 
Mohanty D, Ghosh K. The Changing Trends in 
Prenatal Diagnosis of Hemoglobinopathies in 
India: The Quest of a Single Center to Reduce the 
Burden 
of 
Disease 
over 
Three 
Decades. 
Hemoglobin. 
2021 
Mar;45(2):112-118. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.1908346. 
72. Ghosh S, Chakrabarti S, Bhattacharyya M. 
Prenatal 
Screening 
and 
Diagnosis 
of 
ß-
Thalassemia in India: Is ARMS-PCR Enough? Indian 
J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2021 Jul;37(3):448-452. 
doi: 10.1007/s12288-020-01370-0. 
73. Phaophan A, Mongkolchat N, Chuenwattana P, 
Viboonchart S. Factors affecting Thai pregnant 
women's decisions concerning prenatal diagnosis 
and termination of pregnancy for β-thalassemia. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2021 Feb;47(2):631-639. doi: 
10.1111/jog.14573 
74. Chen D, Shen X, Wu C, Xu Y, Ding C, Zhang G, Xu 
Y, Zhou C. Eleven healthy live births: a result of 
simultaneous preimplantation genetic testing of α- 
and 
β-double 
thalassemia 
and 
aneuploidy 
screening. 
J 
Assist 
Reprod 
Genet. 
2020 
Mar;37(3):549-557. doi: 10.1007/s10815-020-01732-
7. 
75. Chen C, Li R, Sun J, Zhu Y, Jiang L, Li J, Fu F, Wan 
J, Guo F, An X, Wang Y, Fan L, Sun Y, Guo X, Zhao S, 
Wang W, Zeng F, Yang Y, Ni P, Ding Y, Xiang B, Peng 
Z, Liao C. Noninvasive prenatal testing of α-
thalassemia 
and 
β-thalassemia 
through 
population-based parental haplotyping. Genome 
Med. 2021 Feb 5;13(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s13073-021-
00836-8.  
76. Jiang F, Liu W, Zhang L, Guo Y, Chen M, Zeng X, 
Wang Y, Li Y, Xian J, Du B, Xie Y, Ouyang S, Li S, Yang 
Y, Zhang C, Luo F, Sun X. Noninvasive prenatal 
testing for β-thalassemia by targeted nanopore 
sequencing combined with relative haplotype 
dosage (RHDO): a feasibility study. Sci Rep. 2021 
Mar 11;11(1):5714. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-85128-
2.  
77. Giambona A, Damiani G, Vinciguerra M, et al. 
Incidence of haemoglobinopathies in Sicily: the 
impact of screening and prenatal diagnosis. Int J 
Clin 
Pract. 
2015;69(10):1129-1138. 
doi:10.1111/ijcp.12628 
78. Ladis V, Karagiorga-Lagana M, Tsatra I, 
Chouliaras G. Thirty-year experience in preventing 
haemoglobinopathies in Greece: achievements 
and potentials for optimisation. Eur J Haematol. 
2013;90(4):313-322. doi:10.1111/ejh.12076 
79. Blue Book of thalassemia in China (Beijing 
AngelMom 
Charity 
Foundation, 
China 
Philanthropy Research Institute) 2016 
80. Galton F.  Eugenics: its definition, scope, and 
aims. Am J Sociol. 1904; 10(1) 
81. Advisory Committee on Health Research. WHO. 
Genomics and World Health. 2002. 
82. Angastiniotis M, Petrou M, Loukopoulos D, 
Modell B, Farmakis D, Englezos P, Eleftheriou A. 
The Prevention of Thalassemia Revisited: A 
Historical 
and 
Ethical 
Perspective 
by 
the 
Thalassemia 
International 
Federation. 
Hemoglobin. 
2021 
Jan;45(1):5-12. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.1872612. 
83. Mukherjee MB, Colah RB, Mehta PR, Shinde N, 
Jain D, Desai S, Dave K, Italia Y, Raicha B, Serrao E. 
Multicenter Evaluation of HemoTypeSC as a Point-
of-Care Sickle Cell Disease Rapid Diagnostic Test 
for Newborns and Adults Across India. Am J Clin 
Pathol. 
2020 
Jan 
1;153(1):82-87. 
doi: 
10.1093/ajcp/aqz108. 
84. Guindo A, Cisse Z, Keita I, Desmonde S, Sarro 
YDS, Touré BA, Baraika MA, Tessougué O, Guindo 
P, Coulibaly M, Traore O, Sylla N, Diassana M, Saye 
A, Picot V, Lauressergues E, Leroy V. Potential for a 
large-scale newborn screening strategy for sickle 
cell disease in Mali: A comparative diagnostic 
performance study of two rapid diagnostic tests 
(SickleScan® and HemotypeSC®) on cord blood. Br 
J 
Haematol. 
2024 
Jan;204(1):337-345. 
doi: 
10.1111/bjh.19108. 
85. Shrivas S, Patel M, Kumar R, Gwal A, Uikey R, 
Tiwari SK, Verma AK, Thota P, Das A, Bharti PK, 
Shanmugam R. Evaluation of Microchip-Based 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
32 
Point-Of-Care Device "Gazelle" for Diagnosis of 
Sickle Cell Disease in India. Front Med (Lausanne). 
2021 
Oct 
13;8:639208. 
doi: 
10.3389/fmed.2021.639208. 
86. Zhao J, Li J, Lai Q, Yu Y. Combined use of gap-
PCR and next-generation sequencing improves 
thalassaemia carrier screening among premarital 
adults in China. J Clin Pathol. 2020 Aug;73(8):488-
492. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2019-206339. 
87. Zhan L, Gui C, Wei W, Liu J, Gui B. Third 
generation sequencing transforms the way of the 
screening and diagnosis of thalassemia: a mini-
review. Front Pediatr. 2023 Jul 6;11:1199609. doi: 
10.3389/fped.2023.1199609. 
88. Erlich HA, Ko L, Lee J, Eaton K, Calloway CD, Lal 
A, Das R, Jamwal M, Lopez-Pena C, Mack SJ. Non-
invasive 
prenatal 
testing 
of 
beta-
hemoglobinopathies 
using 
next 
generation 
sequencing, in-silico sequence size selection, and 
haplotyping. Croat Med J. 2024 Jun 13;65(3):180-
188. doi: 10.3325/cmj.2024.65.180. 
89. Amid A, Barrowman N, Odame I, Kirby-Allen M. 
Optimizing transfusion therapy for survivors of 
Haemoglobin Bart's hydrops fetalis syndrome: 
Defining the targets for haemoglobin-H fraction 
and "functional" haemoglobin level. Br J Haematol. 
2022 May;197(3):373-376. doi: 10.1111/bjh.18077 
90. Horvei P, MacKenzie T, Kharbanda S. Advances 
in the management of α-thalassemia major: 
reasons to be optimistic. Hematology Am Soc 
Hematol Educ Program. 2021 Dec 10;2021(1):592-
599. doi: 10.1182/hematology.2021000295. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
33 
 
 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
34 
3. REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA 
PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., & Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Patients with haemoglobin disorders continue to be born, in small or large numbers as a result of lack of 
effective control programmes across the world. Moreover, and although improvements to variable extents in 
medical and public health services have occurred in many countries around the world and which allow better 
survival of these patients, the suboptimal medical and social care provided to a great percentage of them, 
perhaps to the majority of them, leads to high levels of early, premature death. The rising number of annual 
affected births is a major contributing factor to providing suboptimal care services and continues to be the case 
in many, if not most, countries. This poses very serious challenges to health and social care systems, as patients 
with these disorders, necessitate multiple elements of medical treatment and complex social care. The 
provision of care for these patients, is therefore directly related to the level of the Human Development Index 
(HDI) of each country, the competencies of its healthcare and social welfare systems to address the needs of 
annually rising numbers of cases in the absence of prevention, as well as other competing public health 
priorities, particularly, but not confined to, communicable diseases. Although a new, long-awaited innovative 
gene-based curative treatment has been authorised recently (2019) (while others are in advance phase of 
research), it will take time and immense resources to be widely applied. Bone marrow transplantation on the 
other hand, has been adopted as a cure of thalassaemia for decades albeit this can only address with sufficient 
safety and effectiveness to-date only 20 – 30% of the patient population who can secure absolute sibling 
matched donors. Furthermore, its level of success lies on specific patient criteria and importantly on the quality 
and experience of the providing transplant centre. Thus, effective prevention programmes still to date, offer 
the most important means to achieving advances in the quality-of-care services. 
Over the last 2 – 3 decades the advances achieved in the area of clinical management of patients particularly 
with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT) and other haemoglobin disorders have significantly improved 
the quality of life of patients and impressively extended their life expectancy and these have happened in 
countries that have implemented effective prevention polices at the national level. Unfortunately, however, 
such results are not seen across all affected countries. In fact, in the majority of countries of the world, where 
more than 80% of patients with these disorders live, even basic treatment is to-date for a large percentage of 
them, if not for the majority, sub-optimally provided resulting in the development of many and multiple 
complications, poor quality of life and premature death. Mortality and morbidity rates are very rarely reported 
due to the lack of disease specific registries and patient health record systems, and even when these are 
published, this kind of information comes from countries or centres within a country that are able to provide 
fairly adequate management data and have adopted registries and surveillance programmes. Such information 
unfortunately does not come from countries or regions where the greatest challenges exist. Indicators, which 
may predict in a country poor survival of these patients, include a low HDI and weak economies, a high under-
5 mortality rate, inadequate health insurance coverage, poor medical / public health and social service 
organisation and absence of effective nationally co-ordinated prevention and management programmes. More 
disease specific indicators related to poor survival include inadequate blood supply and/or blood safety, 
interrupted and sup optimally provided specialised monitoring of iron load, iron chelation therapy and lack of 
appropriate multidisciplinary care offered by health care professionals with high level of expertise in the field. 
Moreover, the absence of universal healthcare coverage constitutes the one, if not, the most important 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
35 
component that renders a country unable to provide any level of appropriate even basic clinical management, 
to a chronic particularly genetic disease, such as thalassaemia. Even affluent countries, with their high HDIs, 
strong healthcare systems and social infrastructures, when addressing the complex needs and high costs of a 
multi-organ lifelong chronic condition such as thalassaemia, in the absence of effective prevention 
programmes that achieve reduction of the annual affected births are faced with great challenges. The annual 
increase in patient numbers particularly in high prevalence countries in the absence of effective nationally co-
ordinated prevention programmes, obviously becomes more and more challenging directly impacting on the 
standards and quality of care services for these disorders. 
The direct relation between the reduction of annual affected births and the competency of health authorities 
to address the huge, many and multiple medical, public health, social and economic repercussions of 
thalassaemia was first fully recognized in the 1970s by the Southern Mediterranean countries, notably Cyprus, 
Greece and Italy. These are the first countries in the world where thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders 
(mainly SCD) were recognized to be highly prevalent amongst their indigenous populations and which first 
recognised their potential severe repercussions if left inappropriately addressed. As a result, their governments, 
with the support and guidance of the World Health Organisation (WHO), focused great efforts on identifying 
those elements and policies that could contribute to the reduction of annual affected births – a factor that would 
facilitate the re-allocation of resources and thus allow the improvement of health and other care of the existing 
patients as well as engage scientists in more active research with the aim to continually improve patient 
outcomes. 
One must underscore at this point, that the patients and particularly parents in these countries which started 
establishing support groups and developing strong, united voices, contributed substantially to engaging their 
governments in promptly developing prevention programmes. They, too, had recognised since then that 
reducing the annual affected births could indeed support the government to focus attention, research and 
resources on saving the lives of their children (the majority were children at the time), acknowledging the fact 
that until then, patients particularly with TDT were dying before reaching the second decade of their life. 
Below are quoted some important guidance by the WHO through its disease specific resolution in support 
of its country members: 
 
 
WHO EB118.R1 THALASSAEMIA AND OTHER HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES [1] 
Article 1.  
(1) The Executive Board, urges Members States “to design, implement and reinforce in a systematic, 
equitable and effective manner, comprehensive national, integrated programmes for prevention and 
management of thalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies, including surveillance, 
dissemination of information, awareness-raising and screening, such programmes being tailored to 
specific socioeconomic and cultural contexts and aimed at reducing the incidence, morbidity and 
mortality associated with these diseases’’ 
Article 2. The Executive Board requests the Director-General  
(1) to raise awareness of the international community of the global burden of thalassaemia and other 
haemoglobinopathies, and to promote equitable access to health services for prevention and 
management of these diseases. 
(2) to provide technical support and advice to Member States in framing of national policies and 
strategies for prevention and management of thalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies’’. 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
36 
Italy, Cyprus and Greece, initially but later also followed by other countries (including Israel, Thailand and India), 
fully acknowledged the value of prevention in the safeguarding and continually improving the quality of care of 
patients and their medical and public health resources (see below historical extracts or country specific 
statements). 
 
 
 
Israel & Thailand: A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Prevention Vs 
Treatment 
In more recent times (2014), it has been estimated in Israel, with an anticipated 45 annual affected births that 
the cost of preventing one affected birth is approximately $63,660 compared to an investment of $1,971,380 
for treatment of a single patient for 50 years. This is related to a total health resource preservation of $76 million 
over ten years. 
Respectively, in Thailand it has been estimated that for every affected birth prevented a total of $1,914.57 is 
saved, considering that the lifetime cost of treatment of a single patient for 30 years is $219,759.00. Thus, 
providing a benefit: cost ratio of 72:1 [6]. 
Cyprus: The Case for Implementing a National Prevention Programme [2, 3] 
Prof. George Stamatoyannopoulos, a medical geneticist at the University of Washington was invited in 
1972 by the Ministry of Health of Cyprus, in his capacity as a WHO Consultant at the time, to visit the island 
in order to provide guidance. 
 
Prof. Stamatoyannopoulos stated in his report to the Ministry that “… [by] offering the best available 
treatment regimens to the current population of patients, each patient would be likely to live into middle age. 
A not insignificant consequence would be that medical costs would escalate and would escalate further as 
[an average 60 – 80] new affected births would be born each year. Absent of a prevention programme, it is 
estimated that the prevalence of β-thalassaemia would go from 1:1000 to 1:138 in the next 50 years (v.2022), 
creating an increase of 300 – 400% in the demand for blood and 600 – 700% in the cost of treatment. Cyprus 
would soon find that the needs of its thalassaemic patients would completely engulf not just the available 
blood supplies but also the entire budget of the Ministry of Health”. 
Greece:  Realising the Future Public Health Burden of Thalassaemia [4, 5] 
A series of studies conducted in Greece between 1962 – 1972 by Prof. Christos Kattamis, paediatrician at 
the University of Athens, showed that 21% of children suffering from congenital diseases who were 
hospitalised were thalassaemia patients. Prof Kattamis concluded that this ‘percentage was extremely 
high and revealed the gravity of the problem’. 
 
It was estimated that the number of affected births in Greece between 1980 - 2009 would be more than 
10,000.  The government of Greece had already invested sufficient annual resources for the treatment 
programme of thalassaemia (since 1965), and based on this new prospective analysis subsequently 
ensued a policy (including community awareness) for the prevention of thalassaemia, founding the first 
Centre for the Prevention of Mediterranean Anaemia 1975 in Athens, and subsequently establishing a 
premarital certificate policy in 1980. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
37 
This essentially demonstrates that effectiveness in prevention is related to significant resource savings which 
can be allocated to improve the quality of treatment, social care and many aspects of the public health 
infrastructure and services provided to existing patients. 
 
Historically, voluntary avoidance of the birth of new cases of thalassaemia was offered in the early days of the 
1970s initially as previously mentioned by countries of high disease prevalence in their indigenous populations 
such as Greece, Cyprus and Italy. This led to a reduction of annual affected births by more than 70% within 2 - 4 
years and in most of them by over 80% within 5 years of implementation of such efforts (See Figures 1-4 & Table 
1). At first the programmes of prevention addressed the “at-risk” couples as part of a national policy that 
involved mainly screening.  The programme was gradually however and with the guidance of the WHO 
extended to include additional components (as seen in Table 2) aiming to secure the programmes’ effectiveness 
and sustainability. This policy was followed in subsequent years by many other countries across different 
cultures, healthcare and social service infrastructures and economic robustness. Successful implementation of 
an effective programme, marked by the reduction of annual affected births, has however been quite poor across 
the world to-date, particularly in countries where political commitment, national organisation and full financial 
coverage of policies have been absent or suboptimal. In conclusion, a comprehensive control policy should 
include both the components of provision of quality care for patients and a reduction of annual affected births, 
if effectiveness of a control programme to address haemoglobin disorders is the target. 
 
 
Figure 1. Cyprus national prevention programme results (Source: Cyprus Population Screening Laboratory) [8] 
India: Anticipated Future Costs Without Prevention [7] 
It has been estimated that in the absence of prevention the thalassaemia population of India would rocket 
to a total of 275,000 by 2026. 
This would require an annual blood supply equivalent to 9.24 million units and total treatment costs would 
surpass 19% of the Indian national health budget. 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
38 
 
Figure 2. Iranian national prevention programme results (1989–2015) [9] 
 
 
Figure 3. Singapore–Decrease in births (1970–2016) [10] 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
The Annual β-thal Birth Rates Compared With
The Expected β-thal Rates In Iran (1989-2015)
Observed Births
Avoided Births
0
5
10
15
20
25
β-Thalassaemia Major Births in Singapore (31 December 2016) 
Number of β Thalassaemia Major Born
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
39 
 
Figure 4. Fall in β-thalassaemia birth rate in Sardinia (1975–2017) [11] 
 
Table 1. Longitudinal trends of annual births with β-thalassaemia (in 5-year intervals) during 1980–2009 for 
expected vs. observed and prevented births in Greece [12]. 
Period 
Number of Newborns With β-Thalassaemia 
 
Expected 
Observed 
Prevented 
1980-1984 
1096 
458 (41.7%) 
638 (58.3%) 
1985-1989 
872 
187 (21.4%) 
685 (79.6%) 
1990-1994 
823 
145 (17.3%) 
678 (82.7%) 
1995-1999 
809 
99 (12.2%) 
710 (87.8%) 
2000-2004 
831 
73 (8.7%) 
758 (91.3%) 
2005-2009 
908 
48 (5.2%) 
865 (94.8%) 
1980-2009 
5339 
1010 (18.2%) 
4334 (81.8%) 
 
China  
The thalassaemia carrier screening for about 1 645 000 couples dramatically decreased the incidence of 
thalassaemia in Guangxi Province and Guangdong Province from 21.7 and 44.6 per 10 000, respectively, in 2006 
to 1.93 and 3.15 per 10 000 in 201713 [An Y, Shen Y, Ma Y, Wang H. Research needs for birth defect prevention 
and control in China in the genomic screening era. BMJ. 2024 Aug 30;386:e078637. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-
078637]. 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2017
Newborns with β-Thalassaemia in Sardinia 
Expected
Found
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
40 
The Global Picture 
The Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) has, as a pillar of its work, the promotion of nationally co-
ordinated and fully funded control services (prevention and management) in every affected country. As a 
patient driven organisation, the rationale behind this, is that improvements of medical and social care cannot 
happen in the absence of effective control of annual affected births. 
In this Chapter, we attempt to provide a crude snapshot of the current services and policies in some countries, 
members of TIF, across the different regions of the world, and their level of effectiveness with regards to 
prevention mainly of transfusion-dependent thalassaemia.  For this purpose, a simple scoring system, better 
described as a ‘ladder’ model, was developed where those in the lower scores can rise or climb the ladder 
(should they wish or decide to do so) to reach higher scores and become more effective.  Such a scoring system 
does not aim, under any circumstances, to criticize the policies or results seen in the different countries 
across the world and neither can it be considered as an accurate representation of the existing situation with 
regards to prevention of thalassaemia in a country. It may merely point out basic deficiencies as these have 
been identified through published literature and/or TIF’s work and to assist its members- national 
patients/parents associations to encourage the heath care professionals’ community and health care planners 
to optimize their national strategies related to the prevention of thalassaemia recognising its value and 
contribution in the improvement of care services for their disorder(s). 
 
METHODOLOGY USED 
Retrieved Information 
Current practices on prevention were investigated through a literature search, using publications recorded in 
PubMed and Google Scholar. Information from these sources on this theme is often unfortunately limited 
and/or outdated, mainly as previously noted, due to the absence of national registries and/or updated 
epidemiological studies and micromapping. Therefore this was supplemented by information contained in 
reports of TIF developed by advisors and collaborators (a variable group of medical/scientific professionals and 
expert patients at the national/regional/international level), who have been visiting, in the context of TIF’s work 
and activities, countries across the six Regions of the world over the years. Many of these reports are 
confidentially prepared by TIF in support of the work of health authorities and/or patient associations and as 
such, they constitute unpublished information of TIF. 
HbE was considered along with β-thalassaemia since it results in a thalassaemia syndrome of variable clinical 
severity. Other haemoglobin disorders, especially SCD and clinically significant α-thalassaemia, have been 
excluded from this discussion since despite their geographical coincidence and the use of the same 
medical/public health/social services, different polices are usually necessary for their control, including neonatal 
screening. 
 
Countries Included 
Α total of fifty-one (51) countries across the six WHO Regions, with one hundred (100) national patient 
associations, members of TIF, were selected for this study, with variable estimated birth incidence of β-
thalassaemia. These countries are heterogeneous in culture, needs, health priorities and socioeconomic 
development. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
41 
It Is Noted That: 
• 
Those countries which are in active turmoil at this time, namely Syria, Afghanistan and Yemen are 
included in this list, due their high affected birth incidence. However, it is acknowledged that these 
have certainly no possibility, today or in the very near future, to formulate or apply any policy while the 
majority of their patients are displaced and struggling to survive.  
• 
The Democratic Republic of China with its large regional variations, and high prevalence in most of the 
Southern provinces, is included in this study, through some of these provinces in which quite successful 
prevention programmes have been implemented in the last 10 – 15 years. 
A small number of both low and high prevalence countries for which reports and contacts are so limited that 
any data are considered quite unreliable (e.g. Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Sudan) are omitted from this study. 
 
Scoring System – Rationale 
TIF has proceeded to develop, based on the rationale described below, a scoring or grading system to crudely 
assess the level of effectiveness of any prevention programme that exists in each of the countries included in 
this study. This work aims to provide a tool that may: 
1. 
Support TIF in its work with governments, healthcare professionals’ and patients’ communities in 
advocating for the value of an effective national prevention programme and to: 
2. Encourage, empower and assist competent national health authorities to engage in a process of self-
evaluation in regards to their existing prevention policies, with a view to facilitate the identification of 
areas for improvement and the better planning of those public health services that will be tailored/ 
targeted to the country’s national needs in the area of prevention. 
 
Grading is an extremely difficult, challenging, and sensitive task to achieve satisfactorily and will of course 
never be absolutely accurate as previously mentioned, particularly in the absence of so much significant 
information and up-to-date data. 
 
The main components recommended by TIF to comprise a national effective prevention programme (see Table 
2) are those which have demonstrated to have contributed to the success of the prevention strategies 
established mainly by the governments of Cyprus, Greece, and Italy back in the early 1970s followed and 
adopted by a number of other countries through the years.  These strategies are primarily related to a 
significant decrease of incidence of annual affected births (as seen in Figures 1-4 & Table 1). 
In later years, in the mid-1980s, such programmes began to be adopted by other countries including the United 
Kingdom and France. These are countries which historically since the 1950s have hosted large numbers of 
immigrant workers from countries with high prevalence in haemoglobin disorders. Hence, these countries 
developed at national level either effective disease-specific policies of prevention and management (v. United 
Kingdom) or policies in the context of national rare disease plans into which haemoglobin disorders were/are 
included (v. France). 
 
 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
42 
Strong surveillance programmes were developed by these countries as an essential component of their national 
programme to closely monitoring the effectiveness of the programme and promoting necessary adjustments, 
amendments, or corrective measures. The work and experience deriving from successful and effective 
prevention programmes contributed to the development by TIF and others, of guidelines for the prevention of 
haemoglobin disorders14  
Several others across the world, including many with significant cultural and religious constraints, have made 
efforts to develop prevention strategies albeit with largely variable effectiveness. 
 
 
 
Some more explanation on each of the above pillars are provided in Table 2. 
TIF made an effort to ‘grade’ the effectiveness of any programme and/or policies existing in a country with 
reference to the prevention of thalassaemia.  
The grading methodology used is explained below: 
• 
The existence of a nationally supported and funded programme (policy or strategy) for the prevention 
of thalassaemia in a country scores five (5) units, as this alone, underscores the existence of a strong 
political commitment to address a medical condition that is considered a health priority. 
• 
Next comes the existence of each of the 5 pillars/services, as mentioned above in Table 2, each 
pillar/service is scored as follows: 
i. 
One (1) unit is allocated for the existence of the pillar/service to any extent;  
ii. 
Two (2) units are added if the pillar/service constitutes part of a national policy irrespective of 
its effectiveness and; 
iii. 
Two (2) units are further added for effectiveness of the pillar(s)/ service(s) as assessed from 
documentation (e.g. published literature). 
 
 
Components of a Thalassaemia Prevention Programme  
considered by TIF in developing its scoring include: 
Political commitment and a nationally coordinated, fully funded programme (policy or strategy) to cover 
the needs of the whole population is the pre-required component of any effective Thalassaemia 
Prevention Programme.  In addition, any comprehensive prevention programme should encompass the 
following five (5) pillars:  
1. 
Public awareness & education. Campaigns/programmes 
2. Laboratory Screening programmes (to identify carriers) 
3. 
Prenatal diagnosis/Gynaecological services/molecular studies 
4. Surveillance system 
5. Genetic counselling services 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
43 
Table 2. Components of a comprehensive programme on prevention of a genetic disorder. 
No. 
COMPONENT 
EXPLANATION 
1. 
National programme 
(policy or strategy) 
This implies national commitment, budgetary support and quality control. 
2. 
Public awareness & 
education 
Without an informed and willing participating public, any strategy will meet 
obstacles. Well-coordinated public awareness and educational programmes 
to reach the larger society constitute an essential component of a national 
plan. 
3. 
Population screening 
Identification of patients and carriers through quality assured nationally 
designated laboratories, sufficient in number and with appropriate 
geographic distribution to cover the needs of the whole population across the 
country. 
4. 
Gynaecological and 
prenatal diagnosis 
services 
Competent, well-trained, and sufficient in number gynaecologists and 
laboratories in nationally assigned centres to cover the needs of those who 
wish to perform prenatal diagnosis (PND), irrespective of their decision on 
how to act on the results.   
5. 
Surveillance system 
Policies that lead to actions at a public health level require a system of 
continuous monitoring and systematic evaluation, not only to know the 
results but also to act as guides to any necessary upgrades or modifications 
the programme may need. 
6. 
Genetic counselling 
To inform and offer choices to at-risk couples and carriers is vital to allow 
couples to make informed choices. In addition, the provision of reliable 
genetic information is essential to identify / diagnose patients in order to 
facilitate their decisions on the next steps in life. This service requires 
experienced, well-trained, and sufficient in number genetic counsellors. 
Note: Pre-implantation diagnosis is a possible choice where technology is available  and costs are financially 
feasible. Based on in-vitro fertilisation (IVF), this technology allows the selection and implantation of healthy 
embryos, not affected by thalassaemia. 
 
In an ideal situation therefore, each pillar could score a maximum of five (5) units and a total maximum of 30 
units if and when each pillar/service scores maxixum (i.e. 5x6). A scoring of 30 would indicate a prevention 
programme that is effective in reducing equal to or more than 70% of the anticipated annual affected births 
within about 5 years of its implementation. Such information of course should be based on reliable nationwide 
published data, deriving from the surveillance system component of the programme; otherwise, the additional 
scoring of 2 units related to the effectiveness of the programme cannot be added to the score (Table 3). 
 
 
 
 
 
Effectiveness is defined by TIF in the context of this grading exercise as the competency of the 
pillar/service to cover the needs of ≥70% of the country’s population in the context of a national 
policy. 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
44 
Table 3. TIF’s grading system for the assessment of thalassaemia prevention programmes 
Open 
No. 
Component 
Indicator 
Score 
1. 
National 
Programme 
A National Policy, Programme, Strategy Exists With Official Status, 
Publicly Announced, Government-Controlled And Fully Funded 
5 
2. 
Public Awareness/ 
Education 
Exists 
1 
Exists Within A National Programme 
2 
Nationwide Or Covers At Least 70% Of The Population 
2 
3. 
Screening 
Exists 
1 
Exists Within A National Programme 
2 
Nationwide Or Covers At Least 70% Of The Population 
2 
4. 
Pre-Natal 
Diagnosis 
Services 
Exists 
1 
Exists Within A National Programme 
2 
Accessible And Available To Cover ≥ 70% Of The Needs Of The 
Population Within The National Programme 
2 
5. 
Surveillance 
Exists 
1 
Exists Within A National Programme 
2 
Nationwide Or Covers At Least 65% Of The Population 
2 
6. 
Genetic 
Counselling 
Exists 
1 
Exists Within A National Programme 
2 
Nationwide Or Covers At Least 65% Of The Population 
2 
 
According to the score of each pillar/service a total score is given to each country (as seen in Annex I) 
 
Based on this scoring system four (4) broad categories (A-D) of effectiveness emerged as shown below in Table 
4. 
Table 4. Score interpretation 
Grade 
Interpretation 
A 
≥ 20 Units 
Describes countries which have established a programme that demonstrates a very good 
effectiveness reflected in ≥70% reduction in the annual affected births. 
B 
19 – 15 Units 
Describes countries which demonstrate a programme of good effectiveness with 
considerable but not sufficient national coordination and support but, with a good potential 
to upgrade its programme to grade ‘A’ with targeted improvements. 
C 
14 – 10 Units 
Describes countries which demonstrate a programme with some disease-specific policies but 
with no national coordination and with weak to poor effectiveness. 
D 
≤ 9 Units 
Describes countries which demonstrate serious weaknesses, gaps and challenges calling for 
many and multiple actions to be taken at the national level. 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
45 
RESULTS 
Based on the information and data collected (as previously described) for each of this component/service in 
each of the 51 countries included in this study (as shown in Annex I), TIF’s scoring system (as shown in Table 3 & 
4)) was applied and each country was given a grade between A to D (as shown in Table 5 separated by Regions 
and in Annex I per country). 
The countries included in this study reflect about 51% of the global population in 2019. In addition, the number 
of thalassaemia patients in these countries, as reported in the literature and by TIF’s estimations, constitute 
about 85% of the global patient community. Therefore, based on the results of the crude Grading System 
implemented by TIF for the purposes of this study, effective national prevention programmes are implemented 
in only 12% of the countries examined.  The affected annual births in those countries represent only 3 – 4% of 
the global annual expected births, indicating that a great number of thalassaemia affected births are happening 
across the world and that effective prevention programmes are still widely lacking [15]. 
Annex I comprehensively presents the prevention policy scores for each of the 51 countries, justified according 
to TIF’s scoring rationale and methodologies. 
Table 5. Summary of the implementation of TIF’s grading system for thalassaemia prevention programmes in 51 
countries (as described in Annex I) 
WHO Region 
Grade 
 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Europe 
Cyprus, Greece, 
Italy 
Azerbaijan, 
France, Turkey, 
United Kingdom 
None 
Albania, Austria, 
Belgium, Bulgaria, 
Germany Romania, 
Sweden 
Eastern 
Mediterranean 
Iran, Palestine 
Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Oman, 
UAE 
Iraq, 
Pakistan, 
Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Tunisia 
Afghanistan, Egypt, 
Morocco, Syria, 
Yemen 
West Pacific 
Singapore 
Malaysia 
Vet Nam 
Cambodia, Lao 
Southeast Asia 
None 
 
India 
Bangladesh, 
Indonesia, 
Myanmar, Nepal 
Americas 
None 
None 
None 
Argentina, Brazil, 
Canada, Trinidad & 
Tobago, USA 
Africa 
None 
None 
None 
Algeria, 
Mauritius 
 
DISCUSSION 
Disease prevalence, in most cases, has been the driving factor guiding political commitment to address the 
Prevention of this disorder rather than the national HDI or the level of the country’s economy.  This contrasts 
with the area of Management where HDI level has proven to be the decisive factor in the provision of 
appropriate health and other care.  
Through the analysis performed on the existing situation with regards to Prevention in 51 countries members 
of TIF, across six WHO regions of the world, as shown above, one can evidence the immense heterogeneity; 
significant success for example has been achieved in areas with high thalassaemia prevalence but with 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
46 
important cultural and religious challenges (e.g. Iran). On the other hand, success has also been achieved in 
areas with high thalassaemia prevalence but long-term political instability and low HDI (e.g. Palestine). Also, 
smaller areas with very low prevalence but a robust healthcare infrastructure and a high HDI (v. Singapore) have 
achieved effective prevention and as such is singled-out in the entire region for its effectiveness. 
These, together with the countries in the southern Mediterranean, including Italy, Cyprus and Greece, for which 
there is ample reference throughout this chapter, are included in SCORING CATEGORY A characterising those 
countries that have demonstrated effectiveness in their prevention strategies. 
 The countries in SCORING CATEGORY B have also focused appropriate efforts and work on addressing the 
control of haemoglobin disorders and in their case too, high prevalence has been the key driver for achieving 
political commitment to develop disease-specific policies. Although published data to-date have not 
documented the level of effectiveness with regards to prevention (as defined as a decrease by ≥ 70% of annual 
affected births at a national level) many and significant steps have been taken through the years in these 
countries across each pillar (as described in Table 2) of the prevention programme. These include for example 
many public awareness initiatives, large screening studies and implementation of genetic counselling services 
to a smaller or greater extent. In most of these countries, the services related to the component of PND were 
not satisfactorily addressed and have not reached neither all those in need nor at least a significant proportion 
of couples “at-risk”. This has happened in some countries as a result of cultural and religious norms; but in many 
others this has occurred on account of medical and healthcare infrastructure challenges and poor economies in 
addition to other important health priorities (including communicable diseases) that needed to be addressed. 
In some countries of this category, the small to medium geographic size of the country and/or population, good 
public health infrastructure, and/or strong scientific interest provide significant potential for their programmes 
to reach effectiveness in the near future, including Malaysia, Maldives, Sri Lanka. The huge steps taken in 
Thailand over the years, as well as the implementation of many disease-related policies, unfortunately have not 
allowed the country to achieve the goal of nationwide effectiveness of prevention. This has been the result of 
not only of vast genetic and thus phenotypic heterogeneity of haemoglobin disorders in the country but also 
on account of the country’s size and level of population’s heath literacy and education in passing out 
information and awareness in rural or remote parts of the country and the wide and variable distribution of 
haemoglobin disorders, especially in rural areas. Other countries in this category, mainly in the European Union 
and across the extended European region, including the United Kingdom, France, Turkey and Azerbaijan have 
exhibited reasonable effective programmes. The former two (i.e. United Kingdom and France) being countries 
with robust healthcare infrastructures and strong economies felt that it was essential and cost effective to 
address the prevention of haemoglobin disorders, which were of high prevalence among their immigrant 
populations; while for the latter two, Turkey and Azerbaijan, high prevalence in their indigenous population was 
the driving element for political commitment for significant steps to be made in order to reduce the annual 
affected births whilst acknowledging the great benefit this would have on their patients’ quality of care and the 
amelioration of the ‘burden’ on their public health infrastructures. In countries of Scoring Category B, and 
although to-date very limited published data is available, reductions of annual affected births have occurred 
but not quite to levels as those defined by TIF as effective. 
SCORING CATEGORY C includes countries with a great focus on haemoglobin disorders as well as the 
existence of strong political interest to address the control of haemoglobin disorders. These have led to the 
promotion and development of many and multiple disease – specific policies and programmes. However, these 
countries (including India and Pakistan) on account of either large populations, and/or diverse ethnic 
backgrounds, and/or geographic challenges (e.g. size, terrain etc.), and/or other competing health priorities, 
and/or weak health and social care infrastructures, and/or weak economies have to-date shown poor results in 
the prevention component of the control of haemoglobin disorders. In other countries of this category (e.g. 
Saudi Arabia) cultural and/or religious beliefs to a large extent have perhaps hindered the implementation of a 
national programme and the achievement of a good level of effectiveness with regards to the prevention of 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
47 
haemoglobin disorders.  On the other hand, Iraq – a country with a very long history of interest in haemoglobin 
disorders and long-term planning for an effective prevention programme, has been unable to adopt a national 
strategy thus far, due to political turmoil and instability, which has suffocated the country for more than two 
decades now. 
Other countries, including Viet Nam, are still quite in the early stages of planning, however political 
commitment does exist for such a programme to proceed. Tunisia, included in this category, is a country with a 
long history of interest and quality work done in the area of both management and prevention of thalassaemia 
since the early 1990s. Unfortunately, the country has suffered political turmoil in the last 20 years which have 
not only allowed the strengthening of such strategies, but also sadly resulted in their regression. Noteworthy, 
is the fact that all the countries in this category have made important progress in the clinical management of 
these disorders. 
The countries included within SCORING CATEGORY D represent those which have not focused enough efforts 
and have not to-date prioritised the prevention of haemoglobin disorders at any level. In this Scoring Category 
many, if not all, countries have focused work only on the clinical management of the disorders; some of them 
with great, but many with very limited, success. The countries in this category are of variable levels of HDI, 
different capacities of medical / public health infrastructures and different levels of thalassaemia prevalence. 
This category includes the USA, Canada, Austria, Belgium, Sweden and Germany which are all countries of low 
to medium prevalence mainly within their immigrant population groups, very high HDI and strong and robust 
medical and public health infrastructures. In two of these countries (v. Austria and Sweden) these disorders have 
only very recently been introduced and thus constitute very rare disorders. In contrast Bulgaria, Romania, 
Albania have low to medium thalassaemia prevalence in their indigenous populations but weak economies and 
healthcare infrastructures. Their focus has been confined to providing medical and public health services to the 
patients. Morocco with a medium prevalence and medium HDI has also focused more on clinical management 
and very confined work on prevention strategies. Nepal on the other hand, with medium to high thalassaemia 
prevalence but fragile economy and weak healthcare infrastructure, coupled with many geographic challenges 
has focused more, albeit with limited success, on clinical management and not addressed to any extent any of 
the essential components of prevention. Across the spectrum, Yemen with medium to high prevalence of the 
disease, very low HDI and almost a completely destroyed healthcare infrastructure consequent to the ongoing 
civil war, has lost every hope of strengthening and continuing the work it started some 25 years ago on the 
control of thalassaemia. Finally, Brazil, Argentina and Trinidad & Tobago are countries of the South American 
region with medium to high HDI and variable prevalence of haemoglobin disorders historically confined to 
immigrant groups These, have since become integrated into the respective indigenous populations of each 
country, thus peaking the interest of governments in addressing as a priority the medical and social care of 
patients with these disorders and less on the disease(s) prevention strategies. 
 
New data for the 2024 update: 
EGYPT: has initiated a national programme which includes mainly family screening [16] but premarital and 
school screening were included in 2023. 
 
JORDAN: is an example of a country with a long-standing national prevention programme based on premarital 
screening, yet it is not fully effective. A recent study concerning awareness among university students indicated 
that whereas 90% are aware of the premarital screening availability, 23% would not be deterred from marrying 
their anticipated partner and believed engaging in at-risk marriage was a valid idea. This is not a negative result, 
but it is indicative of a cultural influence in choosing a life partner [17] These observations are similar to a 
previous study from Jordan [18]. 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
48 
INDONESIA: A national prevention programme has been initiated: phase 1 consists of a free family screening 
program, and this has already started (immediate family members of patients and of all ages are included). This 
will be followed by phase 2, which will include the extended family and then phase 3, which will be offered to 
the public, mainly as a way to minimise at risk weddings. The challenges to this plan include: 
• 
The test is not required before marriage 
• 
There is limited access for couples living in remote areas 
• 
The huge and diverse population, with many religious and cultural groups 
• 
The poor level of education in much of the population 
• 
A culture of not believing in hospitals 
• 
Limited resources 
These points were discussed with TIF in a virtual meeting in October 2022. 
 
MALAYSIA: The national program (initiated in its present form in 2016) attempts primary prevention by 
screening school pupils at the age 16 years. There is no difficulty in obtaining parental consent for this but 
despite being given a card with the result this is not remembered in many cases at the time of choosing a partner 
for marriage. Since there is a lack of qualified genetic counsellors, advice to the parents and children detected 
to be carriers in screening, is offered mainly by the lab staff who do not fully know the disease. Genetic 
counselling course must be made available (2023). A policy as to who can be a counsellor is needed. 
Antenatal clinic screening is carried out as a secondary measure. If the pregnant mother is found to be a carrier, 
then her husband is tested. One major drawback is that many appear in the antenatal clinic after the 20th week 
and cannot benefit from PND.  
PND is offered in hospitals, and at-risk pregnancies are referred but this service is not offered in all hospitals; 
for example, in Kuala Lumpur only two hospitals have free of charge PND. There are therefore still gaps in the 
prevention program, which need to be addressed. Reduction in birth incidence is not yet recorded.       
Information supplied mainly by Dr Saidatul from the Ministry of Health of Malaysia, September 2022. 
 
MALDIVES: Prevention has been a national policy for many years but in recent years it is not progressing as 
well as it should. COVID epidemic may have diverted attention. Public awareness is still an obstacle. The 
MTS/MBS have conducted webinars for professionals but not for the public. Prenatal diagnosis is not offered 
locally, and some couples travel abroad for the service. Technically, in terms of gynaecological and molecular 
services, it is possible to set up PND in the Maldives. Termination of affected pregnancies is allowed since there 
has been fatwa allowing the procedure in the first 120 days. Many couples accept this. As matters stand at 
present the new affected births recorded (Dr Umar) were: 
• 
2019 – 11 births, 2020 – 5 births, 2021 – 22 births (expected births are calculated to as high as 50/year). 
 
PAKISTAN: The Punjab Prevention Program remains the most organized effort on prevention. This programme 
which was initiated in 2009. It includes Public Awareness on Thalassaemia and other Genetic Disorders, 
Screening of Carriers (extended family screening) as well as Pre-Marital Screening for the General Public, 
Genetic Counselling, Prenatal Diagnosis and Research. To date almost 300000 individuals have been screened 
and almost 6000 prenatal tests performed (Information from the Director of the programme on November 4th, 
2022). 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
49 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, and until other solutions can be offered by science and medicine to decision-makers that can be 
made readily, easily and without great cost and technological challenges available, preventing annual 
thalassaemia affected births remains the only effective tool to safeguard both the survival and quality of life of 
existing patients and the sustainability of medical and public health infrastructures and resources.  
Notwithstanding the existence of a disease-specific WHO Executive Board decision, the ample knowledge and 
experience available on how to develop an effective prevention programme, the plethora of WHO programmes, 
resolutions and declarations (including those on non-communicable diseases, blood and patient safety etc), the 
United Nations Declaration of Human Rights aspiring for equal access to quality healthcare, and the 
prioritisation of universal health coverage as a Sustainable Development Goal 2030, the global situation  calls 
for more structured actions on behalf of national health authorities.  The close collaboration of expert health 
care professionals, the academia and the patient support groups who are equal and invaluable partners in this 
effort with the national competent authorities and under the guidance of WHO is urgently needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
For TIF, effective prevention programmes remain a necessary tool that has proved beyond any doubt its 
substantial contribution to achieving better health and quality of life of patients with thalassaemia. Advocating 
for the implementation of effective prevention strategies therefore remains a key focus of TIF’s work and 
activities across the world.  The Federation’s close and productive collaboration primarily with the WHO, but 
also with other official regional and global health bodies, the medical, scientific/research/, academic 
communities across the world, the, industry and other relevant stakeholders is indeed regarded essential in 
achieving advances in this area. 
The global situation at presently regarding the implementation of effective prevention policies for 
thalassaemia, as seen from this study (please see also map A and Table 6 at the end of this chapter), 
even grossly assessed, is unsubstantial and this despite the huge work done by the WHO and many 
national governments across the globe. 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
50 
 
Figure 5. Map A
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
51 
 
Figure 6. TIF's scoring on Prevention and Thalassaemia Treatment Services (based on available data) 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
52 
REFERENCES 
1. 
WHO Executive Board, 118. (2006). 
Thalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies: 
report 
by 
the 
Secretariat. 
World 
Health 
Organization. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/21519 
2. 
Stamatoyannopoulos G. 1972. Report to 
Cyprus government: EM/Hum. Genet/2 Cyprus 
8501/Rex 
0028 
https://hss.sas.upenn.edu/sites/default/files/Movin
gUptheSlipperySlope.pdf  
3. 
Stamatoyannopoulos, G., Heywood, D., 
and Papayannopoulou, Th., Clinical Delineation of 
Birth Defects, vol. 14. Baltimore, Williams and 
Wilkins, 1972. 
4. 
Kattamis C (2017) Efficacy of Prolonged 
Implementation 
of 
National 
Programs 
for 
Prevention and Treatment of β-Thalassemia 
Patients. The Greek Experience. J Hematol Transfus 
5(2): 1067 
5. 
Loukopoulos D. Haemoglobinopathies in 
Greece: prevention programme over the past 35 
years. Indian J Med Res. 2011;134(4):572-576. 
6. 
Koren A, Profeta L, Zalman L, Palmor H, 
Levin C, Zamir RB, Shalev S, Blondheim O. 
Prevention of β Thalassemia in Northern Israel - a 
Cost-Benefit Analysis. Mediterr J Hematol Infect 
Dis. 
2014 
Feb 
17;6(1):e2014012. 
doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2014.012. 
7. 
Sinha S, Seth T, Colah RB, Bittles AH. 
Haemoglobinopathies in India: estimates of blood 
requirements and treatment costs for the decade 
2017-2026. J Community Genet. 2020 Jan;11(1):39-
45. doi: 10.1007/s12687-019-00410-1. 
8. 
Cyprus Population Screening Laboratory, 
2015 (unpublished). 
9. 
Hadipour 
MHD, 
2019. 
Powerpoint 
Presentation at TIF’s Patient Capacity Building 
Workshop (Hamburg, Germany).  
10. 
Yang LH, 2012. Presentation at TIF’s 1st 
Pan-Asian Conference on Thalassaemia (Bangkok, 
Thailand)  
11. 
Monni G, Peddes C, Iuculano A, Ibba RM. 
From 
Prenatal 
to 
Preimplantation 
Genetic 
Diagnosis of β-Thalassemia. Prevention Model in 
8748 Cases: 40 Years of Single Center Experience. J 
Clin Med. 2018;7(2):35. Published 2018 Feb 20. 
doi:10.3390/jcm7020035 
12. 
Kattamis C (2017) Efficacy of Prolonged 
Implementation 
of 
National 
Programs 
for 
Prevention and Treatment of β-Thalassemia 
Patients. The Greek Experience. J Hematol Transfus 
5(2): 1067. 
13. 
An Y, Shen Y, Ma Y, Wang H. Research 
needs for birth defect prevention and control in 
China in the genomic screening era. BMJ. 2024 Aug 
30;386:e078637. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078637. 
14. 
Old J, Harteveld CL, Traeger-Synodinos J, 
Petrou M, Angastiniotis M, Galanello R. Prevention 
of 
Thalassaemias 
and 
Other 
Haemoglobin 
Disorders: Volume 
2: 
Laboratory 
Protocols 
[Internet]. 2nd ed. Nicosia (Cyprus): Thalassaemia 
International Federation; 2012. PMID: 24672828. 
15. 
Modell 
B, 
Darlison 
M. 
Global 
epidemiology of haemoglobin disorders and 
derived service indicators. Bull World Health 
Organ. 
2008;86(6):480-487. 
doi:10.2471/blt.06.036673 
16. 
El-Shanshory MR, Sherief LM, Hassab 
HM, Ragab SM, Yahia S, Mansour AK, Ahmed AS, 
Abdou SH, Helmy AM, Watany MM, Gad ALllah 
AM, Guindy MA, Mourad ZI, Soliman MA, El-
Farahaty RM, El-Dahtory F, Darwish A, Elmabood 
SA, Kabbash IA, Saied SM. Prevalence of iron 
deficiency anemia and beta thalassemia carriers 
among relatives of beta thalassemia patients in 
Nile Delta region, Egypt: a multicenter study. J 
Egypt Public Health Assoc. 2021 Oct 11;96(1):27. 
doi: 10.1186/s42506-021-00088-9. 
17. 
Al-Eisawi Z, Jacoub K, Alsukker A. A large-
scale study exploring understanding of the national 
premarital screening program among Jordanians: 
Is an at-risk marriage a valid option for Jordanians? 
Public Underst Sci. 2021 Apr;30(3):319-330. doi: 
10.1177/0963662520968468.  
18. 
Alkhaldi SM, Khatatbeh MM, Berggren 
VE, Taha HA. Knowledge and Attitudes Toward 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
53 
Mandatory 
Premarital 
Screening 
Among 
University Students in North Jordan. Hemoglobin. 
2016;40(2):118-24. 
doi: 
10.3109/03630269.2015.1135159. 
19. 
Voskaridou E, Kattamis A, Fragodimitri C, 
Kourakli 
A, 
et 
al. 
National 
registry 
of 
hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Greece: 
updated 
demographics, current trends in affected births, 
and causes of mortality. Ann Hematol. 2019 
Jan;98(1):55-66. doi: 10.1007/s00277-018-3493-4 
20. 
Al-Arrayed S, Hafadh N, Amin S, Al-
Mukhareq H, Sanad H. Student screening for 
inherited blood disorders in Bahrain. East Mediterr 
Health J. 2003; 9(3):344-52. 
21. 
Hadipour Dehshal M, Tabrizi Namini M, 
Hantoushzadeh R, Yousefi Darestani S.  β-
Thalassemia in Iran: Things everyone needs to 
know about this disease, Hemoglobin. 2019; 
43(3):166-173 doi: 10.1080/03630269.2019.1628774 
22. 
Angastiniotis M, Kyriakidou S, Hadjiminas 
M. The Cyprus Thalassemia Control Program. Birth 
Defects Orig Artic Ser. 1988; 23(5B):417-432 
23. 
Al Sabbah H, Khan S, Hamadna A, Abu 
Ghazaleh L, Dudin A, Karmi BA. Factors associated 
with continuing emergence of β-thalassemia major 
despite prenatal testing: a cross-sectional survey. 
Int J Womens Health. 2017; 9:673-679. doi: 
10.2147/IJWH.S141936. 
24. 
Lee SY, Yap ES, Lee EY, Goh JH, Liu TC, Yip 
C. Evaluation of Thalassaemia Screening Tests in 
the Antenatal and Non-Antenatal Populations in 
Singapore. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2019;48(1):5-
15. 
25. 
Ministry of Health Singapore, 2019 
https://www.healthhub.sg/live-
healthy/965/pregnancy-prenatal-blood-tests 
26. 
Al-Balushi 
AA, 
Al-Hinai 
B. 
Should 
Premarital Screening for Blood Disorders be an 
Obligatory Measure in Oman? Sultan Qaboos Univ 
Med 
J. 
2018; 
18(1): 
e24-e29. 
doi:10.18295/squmj.2018.18.01.004 
27. 
Asadov C, Aliyeva G, Mikayilzadeh A, 
Mammadova T, Abdulalimov E, Alimirzoeva Z, 
Mammadov 
C. 
Thalassemia 
prevention 
in 
Azerbaijan: what have we achieved so far? Abstarct 
of the IXth International Eurasian Hematology 
Oncology Congress. Leukemia Research 7351 2018 
S1-S74. 
28. 
NHS Sickle Cell & Thalassaemia (SCT) 
screening programme, Programme Overview. 
Population Screening Public Health England. (2013) 
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/sickle-cell-and-
thalassaemia-screening-programme-
overview#workforce--education-and-training  
29. 
Abi Saad M, Haddad AG, Alam ES, Aoun S, 
Maatouk P, Ajami N, Khairallah T, Koussa S, 
Musallam KM, Taher AT. Preventing thalassemia in 
Lebanon: successes and challenges in a developing 
country. Hemoglobin. 2014;38(5):308-11. doi: 
10.3109/03630269.2014.939279 
30. 
Aydinok Y, Oymak Y, Atabay B, Aydoğan 
G, Yeşilipek A, Ünal S, et al. A National Registry of 
Thalassemia in Turkey: Demographic and Disease 
Characteristics of Patients, Achievements, and 
Challenges 
in 
Prevention. Turk J 
Hematol 
2018;35:12-18 DOI: 10.4274/tjh.2017.0039 
31. 
Waheed F, Fisher C, Awofeso A, Stanley D. 
Carrier screening for beta-thalassemia in the 
Maldives: perceptions of parents of affected 
children who did not take part in screening and its 
consequences. 
J 
Community 
Genet. 
2016 
Jul;7(3):243-53. doi: 10.1007/s12687-016-0273-5.  
PMID: 27393346. 
32. 
Lena-Russo D, Erny N, Serradimigni F, 
Badens C, Aubinaud M, Merono F, Paolasso C, 
Mattei JF, Giraud F. Maladies génétiques de 
l'hémoglobine. Prévention dans les centres de 
planification et d'éducation familiale de la 
protection maternelle et infantile à Marseille 
[Genetic hemoglobin diseases. Prevention at 
centers for family planning and education of 
maternal-child protection in Marseille]. Presse 
Med. 1996 Feb 3;25(4):151-3. French. PMID: 
8728899. 
33. 
Kim S, Tridane A. Thalassemia in the 
United Arab Emirates: Why it can be prevented but 
not eradicated. PLoS One. 2017;12(1):e0170485. 
Published 
2017 
Jan 
30. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170485 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
54 
34. 
Khawla M. Belhoul, Mahera Abdulrahman 
& Rafeeiah F. Alraei (2013) Hemoglobinopathy 
Carrier Prevalence in The United Arab Emirates: 
First Analysis of The Dubai Health Authority 
Premarital 
Screening 
Program 
Results, 
Hemoglobin, 
37:4, 
359-368, 
DOI: 
10.3109/03630269.2013.791627 
35. 
Nanayakkara KK, Rodrigo UG, Perera 
KLN, Nanayakkara CD. Pre-natal diagnosis of 
thalassaemia in Sri Lanka: A ten year review. J 
Obstet 
Gynaecol. 
2017; 
37(7):861-863. 
doi: 
10.1080/01443615.2017.1306841. 
36. 
Rerkswattavorn C, Sirachainan N, Songdej 
D, Kadegasem P, Chuansumrit A. Preventable 
Severe Thalassemia among Children. Hemoglobin. 
2018; 
42(3):148-153. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2018.1502196. 
37. 
Rouh AlDeen N, Osman AA, Alhabashi MJ, 
Al Khaldi R, Alawadi H, Alromh MK, Alyafai EG, 
Akbulut-Jeradi N. The Prevalence of β-Thalassemia 
and 
Other 
Hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Kuwaiti 
Premarital 
Screening 
Program: 
An 
11-Year 
Experience. Journal of Personalized Medicine. 
2021; 
11(10):980. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm11100980  
38. 
Alben-Ali, 
Razan 
(2014) Compulsory 
Premarital Screening 
in 
Kuwait: A Critical 
Evaluation. PhD thesis, University of Leeds. 
39. 
Ngim CF, Ibrahim H, Lai NM, Ng CS. A 
single centre study on birth of children with 
transfusion-dependent thalassaemia in Malaysia 
and reasons for ineffective prevention. Prenat 
Diagn. 2015; 35(1):51-9. doi: 10.1002/pd.4484 
40. 
Mohd Ibrahim H, Muda Z, Othman IS, et al 
Observational study on the current status of 
thalassaemia in Malaysia: a report from the 
Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry, BMJ Open 
2020;10:e037974. 
doi: 
10.1136/bmjopen-2020-
037974 
41. 
Mat MAC, Yaacob LH, Zakaria R. Parental 
Knowledge 
on 
Thalassaemia 
and 
Factors 
Associated with Refusal to Screen Their Children. 
Malays 
J 
Med 
Sci. 
2020;27(1):124-133. 
doi:10.21315/mjms2020.27.1.13  
42. 
Ngim CF, Lai NM, Ibrahim H, Ratnasingam 
V. Attitudes towards prenatal diagnosis and 
abortion in a multi-ethnic country: a survey among 
parents of children with thalassaemia major in 
Malaysia. J Community Genet. 2013;4(2):215-221. 
doi:10.1007/s12687-012-0133-x  
43. 
Wong, L.P., George, E. & Tan, JA.M.A. 
Public 
perceptions 
and 
attitudes 
toward 
thalassaemia: Influencing factors in a multi-racial 
population. BMC Public Health 11, 193 (2011). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-11-193 
44. 
Bener A, Al-Mulla M, Clarke A. Premarital 
Screening and Genetic Counseling Program: 
Studies from an Endogamous Population. Int J Appl 
Basic 
Med 
Res. 
2019; 
9(1): 
20–26. 
doi: 
10.4103/ijabmr.IJABMR_42_18: 
10.4103/ijabmr.IJABMR_42_18 
45. 
Ngo DN, Ly TT, Ngo TT, Nguyen TP, Tran 
TH, Duong BT, Tran DC, Le TT, Lê TH, Tran TT. 
Carrier screening and prenatal diagnosis for α- and 
β-thalassemia in pregnancies at risk in National 
Hospital of Pediatrics, Vietnam. Ann Transl Med 
2015;3(S2): 
AB123. 
Doi: 
10.3978/j.issn.2305-
5839.2015.AB123 
46. 
Alsaeed ES, Farhat GN, Assiri AM, Memish 
Z, Ahmed EM, Saeedi MY, Al-Dossary MF, Bashawri 
H. Distribution of hemoglobinopathy disorders in 
Saudi Arabia based on data from the premarital 
screening and genetic counseling program, 2011-
2015. J Epidemiol Glob Health. 2018; 7 Suppl 1:S41-
S47. doi:10.1016/j.jegh.2017.12.001. 
47. 
Kadhim KA et al. Prevalence, Incidence, 
Trend, and Complications of Thalassemia in Iraq. 
Hemoglobin. 
2017; 
41(3):164-168. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2017.1354877 
48. 
Majid, M., Mutar, M. T., & Talib Hashim, H. 
(2021). Thalassemia awareness among Iraqi people 
in 
2018. 
Thalassemia 
Reports, 
10(1). 
https://doi.org/10.4081/thal.2020.8655 
49. 
Al-Allawi, N. A., Al-Doski, A. A., Markous, 
R. S., Mohamad Amin, K. A., Eissa, A. A., Badi, A. I., 
Asmaro, R. R., & Hamamy, H. (2015). Premarital 
screening for hemoglobinopathies: experience of a 
single center in Kurdistan, Iraq. Public health 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
55 
genomics, 
18(2), 
97–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1159/000368960 
50. 
Mutar, M. T., & Hameed, M. M. (2020) 
Thalassaemia Prevention Program in Iraq: Cost-
Effectiveness 
and 
Applicability 
Assessment. 
Baghdad Medical Journal of Students, Sept Vol 1. 
https://www.baghdadmj.org/index.php/bmjos/arti
cle/view/2/8 
51. 
Mohanty D, Colah RB, Gorakshakar AC, et 
al. Prevalence of β-thalassemia and other 
haemoglobinopathies in six cities in India: a 
multicentre 
study. 
J 
Community 
Genet. 
2013;4(1):33-42. doi:10.1007/s12687-012-0114-0 
52. 
Mirza A, Ghani A, Pal A, Sami A, Hannan S, 
Ashraf Z, Iqbal S, Malik UZ, Hayat U, Fatmi Z.. 
Thalassemia and premarital screening: potential 
for implementation of a screening program among 
young 
people 
in 
Pakistan. 
Hemoglobin. 
2013;37(2):160-70. 
doi: 
10.3109/03630269.2013.773260 
53. 
Bozdar M, Ahmed S, Jamy OH, Bin Hanif T, 
Ali N, Khan Khattak SA. Role of genetic counselling 
in prenatal diagnosis of β-thalassaemia in Pakistan. 
J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2013; 23(8):553-7. doi: 
08.2013/JCPSP.553557 
54. 
Shariq M, Moiz B, Zaidi N, Bin Azhar W, 
Iqbal W, Humaira A, Memon RN. Pre-marital 
screening for beta thalassaemia in Pakistan: an 
insight. J Med Screen. 2014 Sep;21(3):163-4. doi: 
10.1177/0969141314541434. PMID: 25150099. 
55. 
Ouali F, Siala H, Bibi A, Hadj Fredj S, 
Dakhlaoui B, Othmani R, Ouenniche F, Zouari F, 
Bouguerra B, Rezigua H, Fattoum S, Messaoud T. 
Prenatal diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies in 
Tunisia: an 18 years of experience. Int J Lab 
Hematol. 2016;38(3):223-32. doi: 0.1111/ijlh.12457. 
56. 
Baghernajad-Salehi 
L, 
D'Apice 
MR, 
Babameto-Laku A, Biancolella M, Mitre A, Russo S, 
Di Daniele N, Sangiuolo F, Mokini V, Novelli G. A 
pilot beta-thalassaemia screening program in the 
Albanian population for a health planning program. 
Acta 
Haematol. 
2009;121(4):234-8. 
doi: 
10.1159/000226423 
57. 
Petkov GH, Efremov GD. Molecular basis 
of 
beta-thalassemia 
and 
other 
hemoglobinopathies in Bulgaria: an update. 
Hemoglobin. 2007;31(2):225-32. 
58. 
El-Beshlawy A, Youssry I. Prevention of 
hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Egypt. 
Hemoglobin. 
2009;33 
Suppl 
1:S14-20. 
doi: 
10.3109/03630260903346395 
59. 
Gulbis, B. & Ferster, F V. (2010). 
Hemoglobinopathies in Belgium. Belg J Hematol; 
1:50-6. 
60. 
Trinidad & Tobago – report from the 
Association (2019) 
61. 
Ismail 
JB. 
Thalassaemia 
and 
haemoglobinopathies in Brunei Darussalam. Med J 
Malaysia. 1992; 47(2):98-102. 
62. 
Hossain MS, Raheem E, Sultana TA, 
Ferdous S, Nahar N et al. Thalassemias in South 
Asia: clinical lessons learnt from Bangladesh.  
Orphanet 
J 
Rare 
Dis. 
2017;12(1):93. 
doi: 
10.1186/s13023-017-0643-z. 
63. 
Widayanti CG, Ediati A, Tamam M, Faradz 
SM, Sistermans EA, Plass AM. Feasibility of 
preconception screening for thalassaemia in 
Indonesia: exploring the opinion of Javanese 
mothers. Ethn Health. 2011; 16(4-5):483-99. doi: 
10.1080/13557858.2011.564607 
64. 
Labie D, Bennani C, Beldjord C. Beta-
thalassemia in Algeria. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1990;612: 
43-54. 
65. 
Langlois S, Ford JC, Chitayat D; CCMG 
PRENATAL 
DIAGNOSIS COMMITTEE; SOGC 
GENETICS COMMITTEE. Carrier screening for 
thalassemia and hemoglobinopathies in Canada. J 
Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2008 Oct;30(10):950-959. 
English, French. doi: 10.1016/S1701-2163(16)32975-
9. PMID: 19038079. 
66. 
Uniform Screening Panel Core Conditions, 
Department of Health & Human Services (2018) 
https://www.hrsa.gov/sites/default/files/hrsa/advis
ory-committees/heritable-disorders/rusp/rusp-
uniform-screening-panel.pdf 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
56 
67. 
Kotea 
N, 
Ducroq 
R, 
Surrun 
SK, 
Ramaswamy R, et al. Abnormal hemoglobins in 
Mauritius Island. Am J Hematol 1995; 48:293–294. 
68. 
Wah ST, Yi YS, Khin AA, Plabplueng C, 
Nuchnoi P. Prevalence of Anemia and Hemoglobin 
Disorders Among School Children in Myanmar. 
Hemoglobin. 
2017; 
41(1):26-31. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2017.1289103 
69. 
Al-Nood H, Al-Hadi A. Proposed low-cost 
premarital screening program for prevention of 
sickle cell and thalassemia in Yemen. Qatar Med J. 
2013;2013(2):33-37. 
Published 
2013 
Dec 
23. 
doi:10.5339/qmj.2013.13 
70. 
Cheng K, Fucharoen S, Sanchaisuriya K, 
Fucharoen G, Sanchaisuriya P, Jetsrisuparb A. 
Effect of health education on severe thalassemia 
prevention and control in communities in 
Cambodia. Arch Public Health. 2018; 76:13. doi: 
10.1186/s13690-018-0259-3. eCollection 2018. 
71. 
Phanmany S, Chanprasert S, Munkongdee 
T, 
Svasti 
S, 
Leecharoenkiat 
K. 
Molecular 
prevalence 
of 
thalassemia 
and 
hemoglobinopathies among the Lao Loum Group 
in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. Int J Lab 
Hematol. 
2019; 
41(5):650-656. 
doi: 
10.1111/ijlh.13080 
72. 
Modiano G, Morpurgo G, Terrenato L, 
Novelletto A, Di Rienzo A, Colombo B, Purpura M, 
Mariani M, Santachiara-Benerecetti S, Brega A, et 
al. Protection against malaria morbidity: near-
fixation of the alpha-thalassemia gene in a 
Nepalese population. Am J Hum Genet. 1991; 
48(2):390-7. 
73. 
Papua 
New 
Guinea 
– 
personal 
communication Mr Kennedy Steven Pukiehori 
(2018) 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
57 
ANNEX 
 
Country + Reference 
Expected  
β-Thalassaemia 
Births/ Year 
National 
Policy 
Public 
Awareness 
Screening 
PND 
Surveillance 
Genetic 
Counselling 
Total/ 30 
Category 
Greece 19 
1.64/1000 
5 
3 
5 
5 
5 
5 
28 
A 
Italy 11 
0.46/1000 
5 
3 
5 
5 
5 
5 
28 
A 
Bahrain 20 
0.21/1000 
5 
5 
5 
3 
5 
5 
28 
 
Iran 21 
0.43/1000 
5 
5 
5 
3 
5 
5 
28 
A 
Cyprus 22 
5.55/1000 
5 
2 
5 
5 
5 
5 
27 
A 
Palestine 23 
0.4/1000 
5 
3 
5 
5 
3 
1 
22 
A 
Singapore 24, 25 
0.2/1000 
5 
2 
5 
3 
5 
5 
20 
A 
Oman 26 
0.286/1000 
5 
3 
3 
1 
2 
5 
19 
B 
Azerbaijan 27 
0.344/1000 
5 
3 
5 
3 
3 
5 
19 
B 
United Kingdom 28 
0.0018/1000 
5 
1 
1 
5 
5 
2 
19 
B 
Lebanon 29 
0.132/1000 
5 
2 
2 
2 
3 
5 
19 
B 
Turkey 30 
0.121/1000 
5 
1 
3 
3 
5 
1 
18 
B 
Jordan 17 
0.306/1000 
5 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
18 
B 
Maldives 31 
8.97/1000 
5 
3 
5 
0 
5 
1 
18 
B 
France 32 
0.0016/1000 
5 
1 
2 
2 
5 
3 
18 
B 
UAE 33, 34 
1.8/1000 
5 
2 
5 
1 
1 
3 
17 
B 
Sri Lanka 35 
0.18/1000 
5 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
17 
B 
Thailand 36 
0.21/1000  
[An additional 
3.57/1000 With Hbe/Β 
Thalassaemia] 
5 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
17 
B 
Kuwait 37, 38 
0.132/1000 
5 
2 
5 
1 
3 
1 
16 
B 
Malaysia 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 
0.58/1000 
5 
2 
2 
1 
5 
1 
15 
B 
Qatar 44 
0.225/1000 
5 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
14 
C 
Viet Nam 45 
0.37/1000 
0 
2 
2 
3 
2 
5 
14 
C 
Ksa 46 
0.25/1000 
0 
3 
5 
1 
3 
1 
13 
C 
Iraq 47, 48, 49, 50 
0.576/1000 
0 
2 
5 
1 
3 
1 
12 
C 
India 51 
0.58/1000 
0 
3 
3 
2 
3 
1 
12 
C 
Pakistan 52, 53, 54 
1.0/1000 
0 
3 
3 
3 
1 
1 
11 
C 
REVIEWING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA PREVENTION PROGRAMMES 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE IN A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT 
58 
Country + Reference 
Expected  
β-Thalassaemia 
Births/ Year 
National 
Policy 
Public 
Awareness 
Screening 
PND 
Surveillance 
Genetic 
Counselling 
Total/ 30 
Category 
Tunisia 55 
0.122/1000 
0 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
10 
C 
Albania 56 
0.625/1000 
0 
1 
1 
3 
3 
1 
9 
D 
Bulgaria 57 
0.156/1000 
0 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
9 
D 
Egypt 58 
0.7/1000 
0 
3 
1 
1 
3 
1 
9 
D 
Belgium 59 
0.002/1000 
0 
1 
5 
1 
0 
1 
8 
D 
Trinidad &Tobago 60 
0.3/1000 
0 
2 
2 
0 
3 
1 
8 
D 
Brunei D 61 
0.47/1000 
0 
1 
3 
0 
3 
1 
8 
 
Bangladesh 62 
1.67/1000 
0 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1 
7 
D 
Germany  
0.0017/1000 
0 
1 
1 
3 
0 
2 
7 
D 
Indonesia 63 
2.13/1000 
0 
1 
3 
1 
1 
1 
7 
D 
Algeria 64 
0.1/1000 
0 
1 
3 
0 
1 
1 
6 
D 
Sweden 
0.0026/1000 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
D 
Canada 65 
0.006/1000 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
4 
D 
USA 66 
0.004/1000 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
3 
D 
Mauritius 67 
0.371/1000 
0 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0 
3 
D 
Myanmar 68 
0.66/1000 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
3 
D 
Romania 
0.025/1000 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
2 
D 
Yemen 69 
0.484/1000 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
2 
D 
Cambodia 70 
3/1000 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
D 
Lao 71 
5.7/1000 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
2 
D 
Nepal 72 
1.28/1000 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
D 
Austria 
0.0014/1000 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
D 
Papua Ng 73 
0.65/1000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
Syria 
0.625/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
D 
Afghanistan 
0.361/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
D 
Morocco 
0.07/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
D 
Brazil 
0.042/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
D 
Argentina 
0.046/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
D 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
59 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
60 
10. BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERCPECTIVE 
AUTHOR: Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
About Haemoglobin Disorders 
Blood transfusion therapy is the cornerstone of management of many patients with chronic anaemias, from 
hereditary to acquired conditions. Indeed, regular transfusions are the standard of care for the treatment of β-
thalassaemia major (TM). For sickle cell disease (SCD), transfusions provide effective treatment and prevention 
of many complications, including a decreased risk of stroke; for myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) transfusions 
are an integral part of supportive care. 
Although β-thalassaemia major disorders can be grouped together as "transfusion-dependent", it is important 
to note that the clinical onset of anaemia, the degree of haemoglobin reduction and related severity, and 
transfusion requirements remain widely variable across patients. There are several management practice 
guidelines (mainly coming from Thalassaemia International Federation) available for these disorders which 
include recommendations on transfusion treatment regimens. However, current real-world practice 
approaches within these populations of patients may not reflect the ideal treatment circumstances that can 
occur in leading Western medical centres. Moreover, such information has not been widely compared across 
geographical regions. In addition, it was reported in studies that transfusion-dependent patients with 
"thalassaemia intermedia" (TIF) or "Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia" had received transfusion for a 
considerable proportion of their lifetime and had a relatively heavy transfusion burden. Many patients with 
"milder" β-thalassaemia genotypes (such as HbE/β-thalassaemia) may start life independent of transfusion but 
later, and based on their clinical progression as described in the international TIF’s Guidelines for the Clinical 
Management of NTDT (2017), more recently updated and upgraded into two publications: (i) NTDT β-
thalassaemia (2023) and (ii) NTDT α-thalassaemia (2023) Guidelines respectively, may become transfusion 
dependent. The percentage of patients classified as NTDT is at presently largely unknown albeit this is expected 
to be considerably higher particularly in populations where such genotypes are higher in prevalence (e.g. West 
Pacific and Southeast Asia regions). However, one can appreciate the huge need to focus on improving blood 
supplies, and the safety and quality of Blood Transfusion (BT) services across the world; acknowledging the fact 
that consequent to significant improvements occurring globally and in the absence of effective national 
prevention programmes, the number of patients with these disorders in need of BT is exponentially increasing. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
61 
Spectrum of Thalassaemia Syndromes 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Phenotypic classification of thalassaemia syndromes based on clinical severity and transfusion 
requirement. Source: Guidelines for the Management of Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (TDT), 3rd edition, 
2014. 
 
 
Figure 2. Transfusion requirement in various β-thalassaemia phenotypes [4, 6]. Hb, haemoglobin 
Intermittent 
transfusions 
required 
Occasional 
transfusions 
required 
Transfusions 
seldom 
required 
Regular, lifelong 
transfusions 
required 
α-thalassaemia trait 
β-thalassaemia 
minor 
Mild HbE/  
β-thalassaemia 
HbC/β-thalassaemia 
Deletional HbH 
Moderate HbE/ 
β-thalassaemia 
Non-deletional HbH 
β-thalassaemia major 
Severe HbE/ 
β-thalassaemia 
NTDTs: Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia 
TDTs: Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
62 
Even when based on existing published data to date, the blood units of 2000,000,000 units of red blood 
cells needed to address only the known registered TDT patients (grossly estimated) are considered high in 
number, it is expected that in the absence of national disease-specific prevention programmes and 
registries such numbers will remain inaccurate and are to be considered grossly underestimated with 
particular regard to the needs in blood. Indeed, efforts towards developing well designed and disease-
specific national registries and prevention programmes are of immense importance and TIF for many years 
has remained focused on promoting such disease specific activities. 
For more comprehensive information on the wide variability and heterogenous needs in blood of patients with 
β Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (A), Non-Transfusion Dependent β Thalassaemia (B), and α 
Thalassaemia (C), some related extracts from TIF’s Guidelines are included in this Chapter for facilitating the 
reader to better understand the great needs for blood transfusion therapy and to improve policies on both the 
safety and availability of blood. 
Below is an extract from the Blood Transfusion chapter of the Guidelines (A). Please refer to the respective 
guideline found in TIF’s Guidelines to find out more comprehensive information if needed. Important 
considerations related to transfusion therapy in patients with transfusion dependent thalassaemia include:  
• 
Aims of blood transfusion 
• 
Haemovigilance 
• 
Blood Donation 
• 
Blood component specification 
• 
Compatibility testing and alloimmunisation 
• 
Criteria for initiating transfusion therapy 
• 
Transfusion thresholds and frequency 
• 
Volume to be transfused 
• 
Transfusion and the spleen 
• 
Adverse reactions 
An effective transfusion regimen will result in: 
• 
Good growth and development 
• 
Good energy levels 
• 
Sufficient suppression of intra and extramedullary haematopoiesis 
A safe transfusion regimen will: 
• 
Use a product that is collected, tested, selected, issued and administered adherent to established 
quality and safety regulations and guidance 
• 
Be administered by staff trained in blood transfusion 
• 
Involve informed patient consent 
• 
Be performed in a system with a good haemovigilance structure 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
63 
It is recommended that: 
• 
Before embarking on transfusion therapy, patients should have extended red cell antigen typing that 
includes at least A, B, O, C, c, D, E, e, and Kell, (though preferably a full red cell phenotype/genotype 
panel) 
• 
If the patient is already transfused, antigen typing can be performed using molecular rather than 
serological testing. 
• 
All patients with thalassaemia should be transfused with ABO and Rh (C, c, D, E, e) and Kell compatible 
blood to avoid alloimmunisation against these antigens. 
• 
There should be a valid group and antibody screen available prior to transfusion being administered 
 
Criteria for initiating transfusion therapy 
• 
For deciding whom to transfuse, the following should be included in the investigations: 
• 
Confirmed diagnosis of thalassaemia. 
• 
Laboratory criteria: 
- 
Haemoglobin level (Hb) <70 g/l on 2 occasions, > 2 weeks apart (excluding all other contributory 
causes such as infections) AND/OR 
• 
Clinical criteria irrespective of haemoglobin level: 
- 
Significant symptoms of anaemia 
- 
Poor growth / failure to thrive 
- 
Complications from excessive intramedullary haematopoiesis such as pathological fractures and 
facial changes 
- 
Clinically significant extramedullary haematopoiesis 
 
Below are extracts from Guidelines (B) referring to β-thalassaemia 
intermedia: 
A variety of β-thalassaemia phenotypes can result from heterozygous, compound heterozygous, or 
homozygous inheritance of β-globin gene mutations, or their co-inheritance with structural haemoglobin 
variants such as haemoglobin E or other secondary genetic modifiers. Transfusion-dependence has recently 
become an essential factor in classifying the various phenotypes of β-thalassaemia. Patients requiring lifelong 
regular transfusion therapy for survival are considered as having transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia (TDT), 
such as patients with β-thalassaemia major or severe haemoglobin E/β-thalassaemia. On the other hand, non-
transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia (NTDT) – the focus of Guidelines (B) – is the term used for patients who 
do not require lifelong regular transfusions for survival, such as patients with β-thalassaemia intermedia or 
mild-moderate haemoglobin E/β-thalassaemia; although they may require occasional or even frequent 
transfusions in certain clinical settings and for defined periods of time. See the flowchart below on how 
diagnosis is worked out: 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
64 
 
Figure 3. Laboratory work-up to facilitate diagnosis of non-transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia (NTDT). *α-
thalassaemia traits and related disorders include α0 and α+-thalassaemia by deletions and non-deletional α-
thalassaemia mutations. †There are two main types of HbH disease: 1) deletional HbH due to deletions (- -/-α) and; 
2) non-deletional HbH disease caused by α0-thalassaemia and non-deletional mutation (--/αTα). ‡The common 
disorders associated with Hb structural variants include homozygous HbE, HbE/β-thalassaemia and HbE with other 
variants such as HbE/HbS or HbE/HbC or HbE/HbD, HbS (sickle), HbS/β-thalassaemia, homozygous HbC and 
HbC/β-thalassaemia. These diagnoses can be confirmed using appropriate globin genotyping. Reproduced with 
permission from [69]. Hb, haemoglobin; HbF, foetal haemoglobin; HbCS, haemoglobin Constant Spring; HbPS, 
haemoglobin Pakse; BCB, brilliant cresyl blue; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; MCH, mean corpuscular 
haemoglobin; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography. Source: Guidelines for the Management of Non-
Transfusion Dependent β-Thalassaemia (TDT), 3rd edition, 2023 
 
MANAGEMENT OF INEFFECTIVE ERYTHROPOIESIS AND 
ANAEMIA 
General principles 
Despite transfusion-independence being an inherent characteristic of NTDT, it is now evident that associated 
anaemia needs to be regularly monitored with management indicated in various acute and chronic clinical 
settings. Irrespectively, management of chronic anaemia in patients with NTDT needs to be individualized with 
careful assessment of benefits and risks of intervention. As mentioned earlier, it is now established that patients 
with a haemoglobin level ≤10 g/dL are at highest risk of morbidity and mortality from chronic anaemia and 
underlying ineffective erythropoiesis (see below figure) and thus may be most ideal candidates for long-term 
intervention to raise haemoglobin level and prevent future serious and often irreversible clinical complications. 
Patients with any degree of anaemia combined with ineffective erythropoiesis/anaemia-related symptoms or 
complications may also be considered for short/limited-term intervention to raise haemoglobin levels and 
alleviate their symptoms, especially in instances where evidence of benefit is established. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
65 
 
Figure 4. Ineffective erythropoiesis and anaemia at the core of pathophysiology and clinical complications in non-
transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia (NTDT). Source: Guidelines for the Management of Non-Transfusion 
Dependent β-Thalassaemia (TDT), 3rd edition, 2023 
 
It should be stressed, however, that transfusion receipt is not always a measure of underlying disease severity 
but can also be attributed to access to blood products or reflect a physician or patient choice, with varying 
practices worldwide especially in patients with moderate phenotypes. In recent clinical trials, the use of the 
NTDT/TDT classification has commonly been associated with the patient’s transfusion profile in the past six 
months (e.g., <6 red blood cell units denoting NTDT). This may be practical when taking immediate 
management decisions especially as relates to anaemia and iron overload. However, the natural course of a 
patient’s disease course should always be taken into consideration since many patients with NTDT go on to 
become TDT following permanent morbidity development while also some patients with TDT can become 
NTDT following interventions that decrease transfusion requirement. Disease severity and prognostic scoring 
systems have been recently developed for β-thalassaemia but further validation and data from real-world 
feasibility may be needed before wide utilization. 
 
Transfusion therapy 
Transfusions remain the ideal intervention in acute clinical settings that require immediate improvement of 
haemoglobin level or sustaining it in view of anticipated blood loss or physiologic changes, such as during acute 
infection, pregnancy, and surgery. 
Transfusion therapy is effective in supplying normal erythrocytes and suppressing ineffective erythropoiesis. 
Upon transfusion therapy, erythroid activity decreases to 1-2 times normal levels with pretransfusion 
haemoglobin values between 10 and 11 g/dL, 1-4 times normal levels with values between 9 and 10 g/dL, and 
2-6 times normal levels for values between 8.6 and 9 g/dL. There is a direct correlation between linear growth 
and development and the magnitude of transfusion therapy NTDT patients receive during childhood. Although 
clinical trials evaluating the role of transfusion therapy in NTDT patients are lacking, cross-sectional studies 
have consistently showed that patients who were receiving regular transfusions had lower rates of leg ulcers, 
thrombotic events, pulmonary hypertension, silent brain infarcts, and extramedullary haematopoietic 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
66 
pseudotumours. A recent analysis from Italy showed that NTDT patients who started transfusion therapy in 
adulthood had a slowed down progression of disease. Another recent survival analysis of a global cohort of 
2,033 patients with NTDT identified a subset of 254 patients (12.5%) who were eventually placed on regular 
transfusion programs, starting at a median age of 10 years. The remaining 1,779 patients received only sporadic 
or no transfusions at all. Survival was significantly worse in non-regularly transfused patients compared to 
regularly transfused patients for all-cause and cardiovascular disease-related mortality. Such cardioprotective 
effects of regular transfusions in NTDT has also been reported from Oman. 
Rather than enforcing a long-term transfusion regimen, regular blood transfusion, if initiated in patients with 
NTDT, should ideally be for a short/limited term and can be tailored or withdrawn when the desired outcomes 
are achieved. Patients having long-term regular transfusions should be managed as per the guidelines for 
transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia (TDT) patients. The concern with long-term regular transfusion therapy 
in NTDT patients is the risk of secondary iron overload and end-organ failure. Transition to transfusion-
dependence may also have an impact on patient’s mental well-being and quality of life, as it may implicate 
disease progression and require complete lifestyle modification. The magnitude of transfusion load is directly 
linked to healthcare resource utilization as well as clinical and economic burden. Patients with NTDT who begin 
transfusions as adults are also at very high risk for developing red cell alloimmunization and serious haemolytic 
transfusion reactions. The risk of alloimmunization is highest in splenectomised patients and during pregnancy. 
 
PRACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS AND EXPERT 
INSIGHTS 
 
 
1. 
Unless contraindicated, blood transfusions can be considered to manage anticipated 
haemoglobin drop in acute clinical settings such as during acute infection, pregnancy, blood loss, 
or surgery. 
2. Patients with NTDT should be considered for short/limited- or long-term intervention targeting 
ineffective erythropoiesis and anaemia. 
3. 
When transfusion therapy is considered: 
a. Monitoring and management of iron overload 
b. The risk of alloimmunization should be considered, especially in the following 
subgroups of patients: pregnant women, splenectomised patients, never or previously 
minimally transfused patients 
c. 
Blood processing and administration characteristics should be similar to those applied 
in TDT, generally: 
i. Blood storage for <2 weeks, conditioning to achieve mean 24-hour post 
transfusion red blood cell survival ≥75% 
ii. Leucoreduced packed red blood cells (≤1 x 106 leucocytes/unit) with 
haemoglobin content ≥40 g (pre-storage filtration preferred) 
iii. ABO and Rh(D) matched blood 
iv. h (C, c, E, e) and Kell matching highly recommended 
v. Appropriate infections and viral vaccinations and screening of donor and 
recipient 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
67 
Below is information and extracts from Guidelines (C), referring to α-thalassaemia and mainly HbH disorder. 
 
Figure 5. Classification of α-thalassaemia defects (reproduced with permission from Piel FB and Weatherall DJ. N 
Engl J Med. 2014). Source: Guidelines for the Management of α-Thalassaemia (TDT), 2023 
 
Table 1. Clinical and haematologic manifestation of deletional and non-deletional forms of haemoglobin H Source: 
Guidelines for the Management of α-Thalassaemia (TDT), 2023 
Clinical Manifestation 
Deletional HbH disease 
Non-deletional HbH disease 
Haemoglobin (g/L) 
85 (range 69-107) 
72 (range 38 – 87) 
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 
(fl) 
54.0 (range 46.0 – 76.0) 
65.2 (48.7 – 80.7) 
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin 
(MCH) (pg) 
16.6 (range 14.3 – 24.7) 
18.6 (range 14.8 – 24.8) 
Reticulocytosis 
+ 
++ 
 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND MANAGEMENT OF 
DELETIONAL HAEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE 
Patients with HbH disease can present with episodic exacerbation of haemolysis or transient aplastic events 
during infections. While haemolytic (or aplastic) episodes can occur in individuals with deletional HbH disease, 
various publications from different regions have uniformly recognized the milder natural history of deletional 
HbH disease compared with non-deletional HbH disease. However, heterogeneity in clinical manifestations of 
deletional HbH disease is observed due to unexplained reasons. When compared with non-deletional HbH 
disease, in the absence of other disease modifiers, clinically severe acute haemolytic episodes requiring 
transfusions are not characteristic of deletional HbH disease and blood transfusion is seldom necessary. Even 
during significant infections, the haemoglobin level usually stays over 70 g/L and is unlikely to drop below 60 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
68 
g/L. It is noteworthy that the risk of requiring blood transfusion in deletional HbH disease varies in different 
regions. Published case series report that 29% of patients in Thailand, 14% in Italy, and 3% in California were 
transfused on one or more occasions. It is possible that environmental variables (recurrent infections, malaria, 
or nutrition) modify the phenotypic expression of HbH disease, and they increase the probability of needing 
blood transfusion. 
Children with deletional HbH have similar incidences of common paediatric febrile illnesses compared with 
their peers. Patients with fever can be seen in the clinic on the next day unless an urgent visit is warranted by 
the reported symptoms. Checking haemoglobin level urgently is not necessary as a sudden drop in 
haemoglobin level is not expected. However, if there is concern based on severity or duration of illness or the 
development of pallor with or without jaundice, a complete blood count, reticulocyte count, and haemolytic 
tests should be obtained. While aplastic crisis from parvovirus infection is possible, it has been rarely reported 
to cause severe anaemia in deletional HbH disease. 
 
Summary and Recommendations 
Transfusions 
➢ Regular transfusions are not required. 
➢ Episodic transfusions are not needed during most febrile illnesses, unless the haemoglobin level drop 
below 60 g/L in young children or 65 g/L in adolescents and adults. 
➢ Transfusion may be needed for surgery or other specific indications. 
 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND MANAGEMENT OF NON-
DELETIONAL HBH DISEASE 
Transfusion management 
Patients should receive blood transfusions in cases of acute exacerbation of anaemia, typically occurring after 
episodes of acute illness. This intervention is recommended when the haemoglobin level drops below 70 g/L or 
when there is accompanying symptoms of anaemia, with an aim to restore Hb to 80-90 g/L. 
The decision to initiate regular transfusions in non-deletional HbH disease should be approached differently in 
children and adults. Failing to provide adequate transfusion support for children with more severe anaemia or 
ineffective erythropoiesis can lead to undesirable outcomes, including stunted growth and changes in facial 
bone structure. In cases of massive splenomegaly, hypersplenism may eventually develop, necessitating 
splenectomy. Unlike some of paediatric patients with NTD β-thalassaemia/HbE who can remarkably adapt to 
low Hb levels, a similar level of haemoglobin may not be adequate to facilitate optimal growth, pubertal 
development and daily activities for those with non-deletional HbH. This is because total measured 
haemoglobin in patients with non-deletional HbH disease is not all functional as the total haemoglobin consists 
of a variable proportion of Hb Bart’s (γ4) and HbH (β4), which are unable to deliver oxygen to tissues, and 
patients with higher proportion of these nonfunctional Hb are likely to encounter more severe clinical 
symptoms. 
Once initiated, blood transfusions should be scheduled, usually every 3 to 6 weeks, with pre-transfusion 
haemoglobin aimed at a slightly lower level (80-90 g/L) in comparison to that aimed for β-TM. This is because 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
69 
there is generally less degree of ineffective erythropoiesis to be suppressed in nondeletional HbH. It is 
important to periodically re-assess these patients for tapering off or withdrawing blood transfusions when a 
sustained clinical benefit is achieved. This is to minimize unnecessary transfusional iron overload. Most often, 
discontinuation of blood transfusions is considered when secondary sexual characteristics are fully developed 
or maximum adult height is reached, unless the patients have other indications for continuing regular 
transfusions into adulthood. 
It is important to keep in mind that transfusion requirements of individual patients can be dynamic. Children 
and adolescents who do not require transfusions initially may later become transfusion dependent. Therefore, 
regular assessment of clinical symptoms and haemoglobin (Hb) levels at each visit (every 3–6 months, as 
discussed earlier) is imperative during childhood and early adulthood. By contrast, affected patients who are 
born with hydrops foetalis or require frequent transfusions during the first 6 months of life usually remain 
transfusion-dependent, unless cured through haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
In certain transfusion-dependent patients with rare genotypes of non-deletional HbH, the proportion of non-
functional Hb Bart’s and HbH can remain high (>20%), even when following a conventional transfusion regimen. 
Similar to that identified in survivors of BHFS, these patients exhibited subtle improvements in growth and the 
persistence of massive hepatosplenomegaly despite standard transfusion treatments. Such cases may 
necessitate a more aggressive transfusion regimen, akin to that employed in BHFS survivors, which aims to 
achieve a pre-transfusion functional Hb level of 90-100 g/L. Functional Hb is calculated as total Hb x (1- [HbH % 
+ Hb Bart’s %] / 100). In BHFS survivors, maintaining this level of pre-transfusion functional Hb was found to 
reduce haemolysis and enhance tissue oxygenation, resulting in improved clinical symptoms. However, it is of 
utmost importance to carefully evaluate whether the benefits of this aggressive transfusion regimen outweigh 
the increased risk of iron overload for individual patients with severe non-deletional HbH disease. 
The majority of adult patients with non-deletional HbH disease have mild to moderate anaemia and do not 
require blood transfusions. However, episodic (on-demand) transfusions may be necessary in cases of 
haemolytic crisis to achieve a target Hb level of 80-90 g/L. Leucocyte-depleted red blood cells should be 
administered at a volume of 10-15 ml/kg (1–2 units for adults) one or more times based on the severity of 
anaemia. To manage haemolysis effectively, it is crucial to identify and address the underlying causes of 
inflammation and infection, such as pregnancy, oxidative stress, hypersplenism, and pyrexia. Frequent 
transfusions may be considered in more severely affected adult patients for prevention of the disease-related 
complications, such as significant bone deformities and, in rare instances, extramedullary haematopoiesis 
(EMH), and for improvement of their quality of life. Regular blood transfusions should be considered for 
secondary prevention or treatment of thromboembolic diseases, pulmonary hypertension, and EMH 
pseudotumours. 
 
Summary and Recommendations for TDT 
 
 
The recommendations however, provided by international experts in Guidelines (A) constitute the basis 
for the requirements of blood transfusion therapy if and when needed for β thalassaemia intermedia, α 
thalassaemia, and HbH disorder. 
• 
Red blood cell transfusion at a volume of 10-15 ml/kg should be considered one or more times to 
manage acute haemolytic episodes in patients of all ages when Hb <70 g/L with an aim to restore 
Hb to 80-90 g/L. - It is recommended that “effective” haemoglobin be measured at steady state. 
Effective - - haemoglobin can be calculated as total Hb x (1- [HbH % + Hb Bart’s %] / 100). 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
70 
 
 
Adequacy and safety of blood transfusion for addressing the needs of TDT include three (3) main pillars: 
The appropriate goals of transfusion therapy and optimal safety of transfused RBCs are: 
1. 
Use of donor erythrocytes with an optimal recovery and half-life in the recipient 
2. Achievement of appropriate haemoglobin level 
3. 
Avoidance of adverse reactions, including transmission of infectious agents 
According to international recommendations, prior to initiation of transfusion therapy the following are 
important considerations (See Annex I Class of Recommendation & Level of Evidence):  
• 
Confirmation of diagnosis of thalassaemia with appropriate clinical and laboratory criteria (IIA) 
• 
Careful donor selection and screening, aiming at voluntary, regular, non-remunerated blood donors 
(IIA) 
• 
Before first transfusion, performance of extended red cell antigen typing of patients at least for C, E 
and Kell (IIA).  
• 
At each transfusion, give ABO, Rh(D) compatible blood. Matching for C, E and Kell antigen is highly 
recommended (IIA). For example, in Albania the rate of alloantibody formation dropped from 10.1% 
to 1.7% after application of a strict Rh and Kell matching policy [Seferi I, Xhetani M, Face M, Burazeri 
G, Nastas E, Vyshka G. Frequency and specificity of red cell antibodies in thalassemia patients in 
Albania. Int J Lab Hematol. 2015 Aug;37(4):569-74. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12362. PMID: 25865362.]. 
• 
Before each transfusion, perform a full crossmatch and screen for new antibodies, or in centres that 
meet regulatory requirements, perform electronic issue (IA). 
• 
Regular blood transfusions are considered for prevention of significant growth failure, facial 
bone changes, failure of secondary sexual development, and massive splenomegaly in paediatric 
patients. They should also be considered for patients with following: - Hb at steady-state <70 g/L 
- Hb at steady-state 70-80 g/L with the presentation of symptoms before 2 years of age and/or 
spleen size ≥3 cm below costal margin 
• 
A pre-transfusion haemoglobin target of 80-90 g/L is acceptable in most patients. However, 
those with high proportion of circulating HbH and those with ineffective erythropoiesis may 
require higher pre-transfusion haemoglobin level. 
• 
Periodic re-assessment of TD paediatric and young adult patients is critical for tapering off or 
withdrawing blood transfusion when a sustained clinical benefit is achieved. 
• 
Adult patients with non-deletional HbH typically do not require regular blood transfusion due to 
mild to moderate anaemia. 
• 
Frequent transfusions may be considered in more severely affected adult patients for primary 
prevention of disease-related complications and for improvement of their quality of life. 
• 
Regular blood transfusion should be considered for managing complications such as thrombotic 
diseases, cerebrovascular complications, and pulmonary hypertension.  
• 
Monitoring and management of transfusion-dependent (TD) patients should be performed 
similar to patients with transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
71 
• 
Use leucoreduced packed red cells. Pre-storage filtration is strongly recommended, but blood bank 
pre-transfusion filtration is acceptable. Bedside filtration is only acceptable if there is no capacity for 
pre-storage filtration or blood bank pre-transfusion filtration (IA). 
• 
Use washed red cells for patients who have had severe allergic reactions (IIA). 
• 
Transfuse red cells stored in citrate-phosphate- dextrose-A (CPD-A) within 1 week of collection and red 
cells stored in additive solutions within 2 weeks of collection. (IA)  
• 
Transfuse every 2-5 weeks, maintaining pre-transfusion haemoglobin above 90-105 g/l or higher levels 
(110-120 g/l) for patients with cardiac complications (IA).  
• 
Support from International and Regional (mainly European Union) policies, programmes, resolutions, 
regulations, directives and recommendations. 
• 
Keep a record of red cell antibodies, transfusion reactions and annual transfusion requirements for 
each patient (IIA). 
• 
Keep the post-transfusion haemoglobin below 140-150 g/l (IIA). 
 
GRADING OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
Where relevant, recommendations in these guidelines are accompanied by ratings of the level of evidence 
and/or class of recommendations based on the below criteria: 
Level of Evidence 
• 
Grade A: Data derived from multiple randomised clinical trials or meta-analyses. 
• 
Grade B: Data derived from single randomised clinical trial or large non-randomised studies. 
• 
Grade C: Consensus of the experts and/or small studies, retrospective studies, or registries. 
Class of Recommendations 
• 
Class 1: There is edivence and/or general agreement that a given treatment or procedure is beneficial, 
useful, effective. 
• 
Class 2: There is conflicting evidence and/or a divergence of opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of 
the given treatment or procedure. 
• 
Class 2A: The weight of evidence is in favour of usefulness/efficacy and therefore should be considered. 
• 
Class 2B: The usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion and therefore may be 
considered. 
• 
Class 3: There is evidence or general agreement that the given treatment or procedure is not 
useful/effective, and in some cases may be harmful. 
 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
72 
Global Policy Landscape 
 
 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
Blood adequacy, safety and quality, patient safety, and prevention of transfusion-transmitted viral hepatitis 
have been the focus of the WHO and other relevant official bodies at the regional and international levels for 
many decades now as seen below: 
Table 2. WHO Resolutions & Executive Board Decisions Relating to Blood 
WHO RESOLUTIONS & EXECUTIVE BOARD DECISIONS RELATING TO BLOOD*: 
WHA28.72. Utilization and supply of human blood and blood products (1975) 
 
EB79.R1. Blood and blood products (1987) 
WHA55.18. Quality of care: patient safety: resolution (2002) 
EB115.R15. Blood safety: proposal to establish World Blood Donor Day (2005) 
WHA58.13. Blood safety: proposal to establish World Blood Donor Day: resolution (2005) 
WHA63.12. Availability, safety and quality of blood products: resolution (2010) 
WHA63.15. Viral hepatitis: resolution (2010) 
 
In addition, the WHO has in more recent years focused considerable work on the protection of the blood supply 
during infectious outbreaks and on the collection of reliable data with regards to the existing situation of BT 
services across the WHO regions of the world as evidenced below: 
Table 3. WHO Reports on Blood Supply and Transfusion Services 
WHO REPORTS ON BLOOD SUPPLY AND TRANSFUSION SERVICES*: 
Protecting the blood supply during infectious disease outbreaks: guidance for national blood services (2019) 
WHO Action framework to advance universal access to safe, effective and quality assured blood products 
2020 – 2023. (2020) 
Global database on blood safety (GDBS) : Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability (2018-2021) 
 
In particular, the WHO Action framework to advance universal access to safe, effective and quality-assured 
blood products 2020–2023, which aligns with the WHO 13th General Programme of Work 2019–2023 and the 
WHO five-year plan to help build effective and efficient regulatory systems (Delivering Quality-Assured Medical 
Products for All 2019–2023), aims to provide strategic direction to global efforts to address present obstacles as 
regards safety and availability of blood products. It recommends the implementation of a series of national, 
regional and international resolutions, goals and strategies to ensure blood safety with focused, well defined 
strategic objectives. More specifically, in the Action Framework (2020-2023), the WHO reaffirms the importance 
The disease-specific Executive Board decision of the World Health Organization (WHO) encourage every 
Member State to develop adequate BT services, including transfusion therapy guidelines and standards of 
care for patients with haemoglobin disorders: 
WHO EB118.R1 THALASSAEMIA AND OTHER HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES (2006) 
Article 1 (4). The Executive Board, urges Members States “to develop and strengthen medical services, 
within existing primary health-care systems, in partnership with parent or patient organizations” 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
73 
of haemovigilance as one of the strategic objectives of global efforts to improve capacity to monitor, 
investigate and assess adverse events in blood donors and transfusion recipients. 
 
Global Database on Blood Safety 
Table 4. Previous available Reports of GDBS 
Global database on blood safety (GDBS) reports 
Global status report on blood safety and availability 2021 
Global Database on Blood Safety: summary report 2011 
Global Database on Blood Safety: summary report 2009 
Global Database on Blood Safety: summary report 2008 
Global Database on Blood Safety: report 2001–2002 
Global Database on Blood Safety: summary report 1998-1999 
 
 
Figure 6. Data collection for next GDBS report, as published on WHO website. 
 
Particularly relevant, the WHO has published a guidance document on the protection of blood supply during 
infectious disease outbreaks shortly before the Covid-19 pandemic in 2019 and an interim guidance document 
on the management of blood supply and collection of convalescent plasma in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic in February 2021. In the former document, extensive guidance is provided on a number of important 
pillars to ensure readiness of blood services to develop national plans to respond to any emerging infectious 
threads to the sufficiency and/or safety of the blood supply including global collaboration in monitoring for 
infectious threats, accurate and reliable information about a threat, good understanding of its/their 
implication(s), possible actions to respond and risk assessment of threat amongst others. Very importantly the 
significance of reliable, updated and continuous communication to the public, education of staff, donors and 
health care professionals as well as appropriate adherence to clinical use of blood and haemovigilance 
programmes in a well-coordinated manner at national level were included as important pillars in the said 
document. 
In the WHO Interim Guidance (February 2021 during COVID-19 pandemic), key points included the 
encouragement of member states for their blood transfusion services to take steps to avert potential shortages 
of blood and components and promote amongst other guidance, effective awareness campaigns on the 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
74 
importance of maintaining an adequate national blood supply using different communication platform to reach 
all segments of the population.  
In addition, and in support of the vision to use blood, components and products in the most appropriate way 
possible and avoid wastages and clinically unnecessary transfusions thus contributing to a more sustainable 
blood supply at national level, WHO developed Guidelines on clinical use of blood/transfusion since the 1990s 
and which are subject to periodic updating. These have contributed significantly through the years to the blood 
supply chain and more appropriate investment of blood transfusions, where these were officially integrated 
into the National Transfusion Services policies and where these have been/are appropriately monitored for their 
implementation and outcome. 
The concept of Patient Blood Management, more actively promoted by WHO and others in recent years, 
focuses on improving health outcomes by clinically indicated treatment of underlying causes of anaemia and 
may in this way prevent the use for blood transfusion long before transfusion is even considered. The WHO has 
published a Policy Brief on “The Urgent Need to Implement Patient Blood Management”. This work comes to 
fill another gap in the chain that exists globally in addressing the risks for iron deficiency, anaemia, blood loss 
and coagulopathy in a comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach, from which further to the patients and 
care givers, health insurance systems and health authorities including public healthcare systems at large will be 
amongst the beneficiaries. 
 
The United Nations (UN) and the WHO have in addition focused considerable attention on encouraging 
Member States across the world to transform their healthcare systems to universal coverage-based ones. This 
constitutes a very important goal of the UN SDG (UN Sustainable Development Goals) for 2030 as seen below. 
Universal Health Coverage 
 
Figure 7. UN Resolution: 67/81. Global health and foreign policy (2012) 
Patient blood management, an evidence-based bundle of care to optimize medical and surgical patient 
outcomes by clinically managing and preserving a patient’s own blood, is a key concept that needs to be 
further implemented and expanded on a global level through the development and implementation of 
accredited, standardized programmes that will contribute to the best possible allocation of blood supplies 
and the minimization of inappropriate use of blood. This is especially relevant in times of shortage of blood 
donations, such as infectious disease outbreaks settings. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
75 
 
Figure 8. UN Resolution: 67/81. Global health and foreign policy (2012) - continued 
 
GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM 
An ecosystem is defined as “a system, or a group of interconnected elements, formed by the interaction of a 
community of organisms with their environment”. Comprised of different stakeholders, active in different fields 
relevant to blood safety and adequacy, the global blood ecosystem revolves around five – often interconnecting 
– pillars: policymaking; the development and promotion of safety standards; the oversight of blood services; 
the provision of education and training opportunities to patients, doctors, laboratory scientists and blood 
donors; and advocacy. 
 
Policymaking 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has been at the forefront of the movement to improve blood and blood 
product safety and availability as mandated by successive World Health Assembly resolutions, the earliest 
dating from 1975. However, significant challenges remain in providing access to sufficient, affordable and 
sustainable supplies of blood and blood products, while ensuring the quality and safety of these products in the 
presence of known and emerging threats to public health. 
To address these challenges, the WHO collaborates with member states, collaborating centres and partners in 
order to recommend policies, share information and knowledge, and coordinate technical support and to 
maximise the impact of on the ground events to increase blood donations, and to support blood system 
strengthening and universal access to blood transfusion. Its contribution and leadership in the field of blood 
safety and availability have been outlined further above. 
At the regional level, the European Union (EU) works to address common challenges amongst its Member 
States, i.e. interruptions in supply, the exposure of citizens to avoidable risks, unequal levels of safety and 
quality, barriers to the exchange of blood, tissues and cells across Europe. This is achieved with the adoption of 
Directives and Regulations by the EU Member States. A new Regulation on standards of quality and safety for 
substances of human origin intended for human application was proposed by the European Commission, 
agreed upon by the European Parliament and the Council and was adopted in 2024. This will introduce novelties 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
76 
in the EU blood ecosystem, including a strong EU oversight of blood establishments, harmonised standards 
and an EU alert system for blood shortages. 
 
Standards 
To protect the right of patients to health, the Council of Europe (CoE) has issued a number of 
recommendations, based on the Guidelines and Standards developed by the European Directorate for the 
Quality of Medicines & HealthCare, in collaboration with the European Committee on Blood Transfusion, which 
aims to oversee and coordinate the Council of Europe’s work in the field of blood transfusion and advise the 
Committee of Ministers on all questions within its field of competence. Its overall aim is to ensure social rights 
by elaborating and promoting high ethical, safety and quality standards in the field of blood transfusion. These 
are known as the “Blood Guide”, i.e. the Council of Europe’s “Guide to the preparation, use and quality 
assurance of blood components”, which governs blood safety practices across Europe. 
The Association for the Advancement of Blood & Biotherapies (AABB) sets standards that optimise and 
advance quality and safety for the blood and biotherapies field in the United States. Since 1957, AABB standards 
have been the backbone of AABB’s mission and are currently applied to AABB-Accredited facilities in more than 
50 countries and other facilities to advance their quality and safety measures. AABB Standards combine 
internationally accepted quality management system requirements with relevant technical requirements for 
each discipline. - from specification of equipment, materials management, and organisational structure to 
documents, resource management, and programme assessment. 
 
Oversight of Blood Establishments 
The Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States of America, is one of the federal 
agencies responsible for promoting the safety of the U.S. blood supply. CDC conducts investigations and 
oversees surveillance of blood collections and donations.  
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Centre for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) is 
responsible for regulatory oversight of the U.S. blood supply. It promulgates and enforces standards for blood 
collection and for the manufacturing of blood products, including both transfusible components of whole 
blood, pharmaceuticals derived from blood cells or plasma, and related medical devices. It also inspects blood 
establishments and monitors reports of errors, accidents and adverse clinical events. CBER works closely with 
other parts of the Public Health Service (PHS) to establish blood standards, and to identify and respond to 
potential threats to blood safety or supply. 
In the European region, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) works to (i) provide 
scientific advice; (ii) strengthen Europe-wide disease surveillance; and (iii) support preparedness and responses 
to disease outbreaks. 
 
Education 
Education in the field of blood donation, safety and adequacy is provided by a great number of stakeholders, 
either patient groups or healthcare professionals (Transfusion Medicine specialists) or blood donation bodies. 
The International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT), having as a mission to advance knowledge and education 
& by advocacy for the welfare of blood donors and patients, is a source of reference for healthcare professionals 
globally.  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
77 
Key stakeholders providing educational opportunities at the international, regional and country levels include: 
- 
International Level: International Society of Haematology; International Society for Experimental 
Hematology (ISEH); International Foundation for Patient Blood Management ; International 
Society for Laboratory Hematology (ISLH) ; International Haemovigilance Network (IHN) ; 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) ; International Federation 
of Blood Donor Organizations (IFBDO/FIODS)  
- 
Regional Level: European Hematology Association (EHA); Pan Arab Hematology Association; 
Africa Society of Blood Transfusion, American Society of Hematology (ASH) 
- 
Country Level: National Haematology/Transfusion Medicine Societies. 
 
Advocacy 
Besides patient associations, such as TIF (PIBA), representing transfusion-dependent communities, the work of 
the initiative Blood & Beyond Alliance in Europe is also noteworthy, given that this is the first multi-stakeholder 
group aiming at raising awareness of the impact of blood transfusion on patients, supporting networks, 
healthcare systems and society at large and having as an overarching goal to help advance policies and 
practices that improve patient outcomes by optimising blood management and supporting innovation across 
Europe. 
 
THE GLOBAL SCENE OF BLOOD TRANSFUSION 
SERVICES TO DATE ACROSS THE SIX WHO REGIONS – 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
 
 
About WHO’s Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 
(2021) 
The Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability (GDBS) requests and analyses data from ministries 
of health of World Health Organization (WHO) Member States. The terminologies used in the survey 
questionnaire were given standardized definitions to promote consistent reporting. Where possible, efforts 
were made to validate the data reported to WHO with WHO regional and country offices. Countries were 
contacted for clarification or correction when discrepancies or unusual patterns were observed. Efforts were 
also made to validate GDBS data by comparing them with data available from other published sources. 
The focus of this Chapter of the GTR is to attempt to identify the challenges that TDT patients face 
with regards to blood transfusion (BT) therapy. The information extracted from the WHO’s GDBS 
Report of 2021 (with 2018 data) and other work of the WHO more specifically at regional level, EMR-
STRATEGIC framework for blood safety and availability - EM/LAB/389/E and Supply of Blood for 
Transfusion in Latin American and Caribbean countries 2016 and 2017, is complemented with 
published information, where available and information and data from the relevant EU competent 
bodies, as well as data and information compiled through TIF’s work across more than 60 countries in 
the six regions of the world (as defined why WHO). 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
78 
However, not all the data provided by all countries could be systematically verified. In particular, answers to the 
questions on the existence of policies, programmes or mechanisms could be affected by individual 
interpretation of the questions asked. 
The results should support changes required to achieve safe blood supply through various levers, such as 
regulation, oversight, citizen and community engagement, and adequate funding. The report also provides an 
opportunity for WHO and other organizations to suggest appropriate guidance. 
This 2021 report continues to recognize that inadequate and unsustainable financing of blood services is a major 
factor that impedes efforts to improve blood safety in developing countries. Governments should ensure 
adequate, sustainable financing for national or regional blood programmes. The financing mechanisms for 
blood services should be integrated within the financial structure of national health care systems. Countries 
with significant external donor funding support should take proactive measures to mobilize domestic sources 
and reduce dependence on external funding, to ensure the quality and sustainability of blood transfusion 
services. 
While best attempts have been made to obtain accurate data from countries, the data submitted by national 
health authorities have not been independently verified. Data accuracy therefore depends on the data 
collection systems in countries, and this report can only reflect the information provided by WHO Member 
States. While many countries report comprehensive national data on blood availability and safety, others 
provide limited information on the activities of a subset of blood centres in the country. Incomplete data and 
potentially different interpretations of some indicators affected our ability to analyse some of the information 
received from countries. 
 
The Global Picture as Captured by the Latest to-Date WHO’s GDBS 
Across the WHO regions (ranked by percentage), 19 (58%) countries in the Americas, 15 (60%) in the Western 
Pacific, 30 (71%) in Europe, 14 (78%) in the Eastern Mediterranean, eight (80%) in South-East Asia, and 39 (91%) 
in Africa reported having a national blood policy. Similarly, 19 (45%) countries in Europe, 12 (48%) in the Western 
Pacific, 17 (52%) in the Americas, 11 (61%) in the Eastern Mediterranean, 34 (79%) in Africa, and eight (80%) in 
South-East Asia reported having a multiyear strategic plan for blood safety in 2018 (Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9. Governance mechanisms for blood transfusion by WHO region, 2018 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Units in the ministry
of health
National committee National blood policy
Strategic plan
Specific legislation
Blood Transfusion Governance
AFR
AMR
SEAR
EUR
EMR
WPR
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
79 
Table 5. Estimated blood donations by WHO region (2018) 
Region 
Estimated whole 
blood donations 
(millions) 
Estimated apheresis 
donations (millions) 
Total (millions) 
% of global 
population 
Africa 
6.1 
0.003 
6.1 
14% 
Americas 
21.6 
2.5 
24.1 
13% 
Southeast Asia 
21.6 
0.7 
22.3 
26% 
Europe 
24.8 
5.9 
30.7 
12% 
Eastern Mediterranean 
8.8 
0.2 
9 
9% 
Western Pacific 
23.2 
3.1 
26.3 
26% 
Global (rounded totals) 
106.1 
12.4 
118.5 
100% 
 
There were wide variations in blood donation rates among countries, ranging from 0.6 to 53.0 per 1000 
population. The whole blood donation rate (median) was 31.5 donations per 1000 population per year (range 
10.9–53.0) in high income countries, 16.4 (range 4.6–47.6) in upper-middle-income countries, 6.6 (range 1.9–
25.0) in lower-middle-income countries, and 5.0 (range 0.6–10.9) in low-income countries. Across WHO regions, 
the donation rates ranged as follows: 0.6 to 35.3 (median 5.4) in Africa, 2.7 to 36.8 (median 14.6) in the Americas, 
1.9 to 25.3 (median 10.6) in South-East Asia, 4.4 to 53.0 (median 32.1) in Europe, 0.6 to 25.3 (median 14.3) in the 
Eastern Mediterranean, and 3.4 to 47.6 (median 16.1) in the Western Pacific. 
Sixty countries reported collecting less than 10 whole blood donations per 1000 population per year in 2018. Of 
these, 34 countries are in the WHO African Region, four in the Region of the Americas, five in the South-East 
Asia Region, four in the European Region, four in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, and nine in the Western 
Pacific Region (Figure 5). Given that seven countries that reported collecting less than 10 whole blood donations 
per 1000 population in 2013 did not respond to GDBS 2018, these figures have changed little since the last 
report. 
 
Figure 10. Whole blood donations per 1000 population, 2018 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
80 
Repeat voluntary non remunerated blood donation practices, which constitute a significant pillar of the safety 
of blood, have as follows: 
 
Figure 11. Proportions of voluntary non-remunerated whole blood donations by WHO region (%) 
 
 
Figure 12. Proportions of voluntary non-remunerated whole blood donations by World Bank (%) 
70.50%
67.60%
79.10%
95.20%
49.40%
98.70%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
AFR
AMR
SEAR
EUR
EMR
WPR
Proportions of voluntary non-remunerated whole blood donations by WHO region
62.80%
69.50%
81.90%
95.60%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
Low income
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
Proportions of voluntary non-remunerated whole blood donations by World Bank
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
81 
 
 
Figure 13. Proportion of voluntary non-remunerated donations (whole blood and apheresis donations combined) by 
country (2018) 
 
 
Figure 14. Total whole blood collections and voluntary non-remunerated donations (millions) by WHO region (2008-
2018) 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
82 
Table 6. Donations given by repeat voluntary non-remunerated blood donors by WHO region (median and range, 
%) 
Region 
Median 
Range 
Interquartile range 
Africa (n=7) 
38 
30-76 
- 
Americas (n=16) 
20 
0.3-87 
16-54 
Southeast Asia (n=6) 
57 
5-86 
31-63 
Europe (n=35) 
90 
0.1-100 
68-93 
Eastern Mediterranean (n=9) 
37 
1-88 
18-45 
Western Pacific (n=18) 
56 
2-96 
32-83 
 
The results of the studies on the reason for donor deferral and deferral rate which is an important component 
contributing to blood shortages leading to insufficiencies to address appropriately the lifelong dependence of 
patients with thalassaemia in many countries across the world, highlighted low weight in lower income 
countries, low haemoglobin and travel history in high income countries and low haemoglobin and high-risk 
behaviour in upper middle-income countries as shown below: 
 
 
Figure 15. Donor deferral rate (%) by reason in countries in different income groups 
 
Processing of blood into components is another major element contributing to the effectiveness of blood 
transfusion therapy in patients with haemoglobin disorders, including thalassaemia, and in particular the use 
of the red blood cell component of blood (the missing one). 
 
0.1
4.76
0.31
1.33
0.17
4
2.53
0.24
0.5
1.93
0.3
0.64
1.42
0.92
0.73
0.02
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Low weight
Low haemoglobin
High-risk behaviour
Travel histroy
Average deferral rate by reason  (%)
High income
Upper-middle income
Lower-middle income
Low income
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
83 
 
Figure 16. Whole blood donations processed into components by WHO region (%) 
 
 
Figure 17. Whole blood donations processed into components by World Bank (%) 
 
Table 7.  Proportion of blood donations processed into components: number of countries in each percentage 
grouping by WHO region, 2018 
Region 
< 25% 
25-<50% 
50-<75% 
75-<90% 
90-100% 
Africa (n=43) 
15 
4 
3 
3 
18 
Americas (n=31) 
0 
2 
0 
6 
22 
Southeast Asia (n=10) 
0 
2 
1 
2 
5 
Europe (n=39) 
0 
0 
0 
2 
37 
Eastern Mediterranean (n=14) 
0 
2 
0 
4 
8 
Western Pacific (n=20) 
1 
2 
0 
5 
12 
62%
91%
78%
99%
78%
98%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
AFR
AMR
SEAR
EUR
EMR
WPR
Whole blood donations processed into components by WHO region
38%
75%
96%
96%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Low income
Lower-middle income
Upper-middle income
High income
Whole blood donations processed into components by World Bank
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
84 
Component Separation 
Blood separation into its components is another major concern since concentrated RBCs constitute the 
recommended appropriate component of blood needed for effective transfusion therapy of TDT patients. 
Although component separation is occurring widely across the world, to-date in some, mainly LMIC and LICs’, 
the red cell components transfused per 1,000 population by World Bank income group is only 5.38 units and 
3.41 units of red cells respectively. One can understand the importance of this when looking at data 
demonstrating that only 1% of blood in the upper-middle income countries (UMIC) is transfused as whole blood, 
whereas 24% and 85% of blood in LMIC and LIC respectively was transfused as whole blood. 
Unfortunately, data for the implementation of the other processes (apart from component separation) that 
contribute to the quality, safety and importantly effectiveness of BT therapy in TDT patients, such as those 
described earlier in this Chapter in the context of the international recommendations for BT in these patients, 
are extremely limited in the published literature, and when available they are only derived from small groups of 
patients in a country and do not reflect the national policies. The only parameters that TIF can use with a certain 
level of reliability in order to relate the effectiveness of BT therapy are the survival rates and the age distribution 
information from official nationwide published data. This data, however, for many countries even with high 
prevalence of haemoglobin disorders is still largely missing. 
 
Table 8. Units of red cell products transfused per 1000 population by World Bank income group 
Income group 
Median 
Interquartile range (IQR) 
Low income (n=19) 
4.3 
2.6-6.0 
Lowe-middle income (n=34) 
5.5 
3.2-10.3 
Upper-middle income (n=39) 
12.7 
8.7-19.4 
High income (n=43) 
28.8 
21.5-37.2 
All (n=135) 
12.3 
5.6-24.9 
 
Table 9. Units (millions) of red cell products transfused by WHO region, 2013 and 2018 
Region 
All red cell products transfused 
% whole blood transfusion 
2013 
2018 
% diff. 
2013 
2018 
Africa (n=30) 
3.32 
3.85 
16 
28.0 
28.3 
Americas (n=16) 
3.40 
3.55 
4 
1.2 
0.3 
Southeast Asia (n=9) 
4.50 
5.60 
24 
32.2 
27.3 
Europe (n=31) 
20.92 
19.79 
5 
0.6 
0.4 
Eastern Mediterranean (n=8) 
3.14 
4.18 
33 
22.3 
27.9 
Western Pacific (n=18) 
17.18 
18.69 
9 
2.9 
2.1 
Total (n=112) 
52.90 
55.7 
5 
7.0 
7.7 
 
Comment 
The most RBC products donated in Europe (745,173,774 population, 2021) and West Pacific (more than 1.9 
billion/ 1,900,000,000 population) 
A major challenge is the extent of total blood donation discarded for a number of reasons as seen below: 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
85 
Table 10. Percentage (median and interquartile range) of total whole blood donations discarded by World Bank 
income group 
Income group 
Median 
Interquartile range (%) 
Low (n=24) 
9.6 
4.3-14.8 
Lower middle (n=37) 
8.0 
5.9-11.6 
Upper middle (n=36) 
6.7 
3.1-8.7 
High (n=41) 
4.1 
2.9-7.4 
 
Table 11. Percentage (median and range) of donations discarded due to reactivity for markers of TTIs by World Bank 
income group 
Income group 
Median 
Interquartile range (%) 
Low (n=24) 
5.8 
2.7-10.9 
Lower middle (n=36) 
4.4 
2.8-6.8 
Upper middle (n=33) 
1.9 
0.9-3.7 
High (n=29) 
0.5 
0.3-1.7 
 
Apart from transfusion transmissible infectious threats (as seen in Table 12), the significant percentage of blood 
discarded constitutes another major concern particularly in low-middle income countries. The causes include 
expired blood but another significant 28% for a number of other reasons (Figure 18). 
 
Figure 18. Distribution of discards of blood donations by reason, 2018 
Positive donations to HIV, HBV, HCV and syphilis discarded are significantly higher in lower income countries 
and in the case of HBV and syphilis in low middle income countries as well. 
 
13%
26%
23%
1%
9%
0.40%
28%
Discarded Blood Donations (2018)
Incomplete collection
Transfusion-transmissible infections
Passed the expiry date
Storage problems
Processing problems
Transportation problems
Other
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
86 
Table 12. Proportions of blood donations with positive/reactive results on screening tests by income group 
Income group 
Proportion of blood donations with positive/reactive results (median and Interquartile 
range, %) 
HIV 
HBV 
HCV 
Syphilis 
High 
0.002 (<0.001-0.01) 
0.02 (0.005-0.12) 
0.007 (0.002-0.06) 
0.02 (0.003-0.12) 
Upper middle 
0.10 (0.03-0.23) 
0.29 (0.13-0.62) 
0.19 (0.07-0.36) 
0.35 (0.13-1.10) 
Lower middle 
0.19 (0.04-0.62) 
1.70 (0.70-4.74) 
0.38 (0.12-0.99) 
0.69 (0.19-1.38) 
Low 
0.70 (0.28-1.60) 
2.81 (2.00-6.02) 
1.00 (0.50-1.67) 
0.90 (0.60-1.81) 
 
Although considerable efforts are still needed to improve or even develop hemovigilance programs across the 
globe, available data report the following with regards to serious adverse transfusion reactions (Figure 20). 
 
 
Figure 19. Serious adverse transfusion reactions reported 
0
0
0
5
11
16
22
33
76
176
198
200
329
679
1491
3256
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Graft versus host disease
Other transfusion-associated parasitical infection
Transfusion-associated malaria infection
Transfusion-associated HIV-1/2 infection
Other transfusion-associated viral infection
Post-transfusion purpura
Transfusion-associated HBV infection
Transfusion-associated HCV infection
Sepsis due to bacterial contamination of the donor unit
Non-immunological haemolysis
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
Immunological haemolysis due to ABO incompatibility
Immunological haemolysis due to other allo-anitbody
Transfusion-associated circulatory overload
Other serious adverse transfusion reaction
Anaphylaxis/hypersensitivity
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
87 
Higher incidences of serious adverse reactions are reported in the South-East Asian region and the lowest in the 
Western Pacific region (Table 13). 
Table 13. Incidence of serious adverse reaction (per 100 000 units of components transfused) by WHO region 
 
Serious adverse 
reaction 
Total number of 
components 
transfused/issued 
Incidence 
Africa (n=5) 
214 
1 457 280 
14.7 
Americas (n=7) 
1 045 
5 654 075 
18.5 
Southeast Asia (n=3) 
1 395 
2 722 070 
51.2 
Europe (n=31) 
2 634 
27 238 559 
9.7 
Eastern Mediterranean (n=4) 
409 
4 070 358 
10.0 
Western Pacific (n=12) 
795 
11 892 266 
6.7 
Total (n=62) 
6 492 
53 034 608 
12.2 
 
Countries which implemented further testing than (over and above) HIV, HBV, HCV and syphilis, either as 
testing for all donations or as selective testing including malaria, HTLV 1 and 2 and chagas disease are 
mentioned in Tables 14, 15 and 16 below: 
 
Table 14. Malaria testing policy in 51 countries 
Region 
Testing for All 
Donations 
(Microscopy) 
Selective Testing 
(Microscopy) 
Selective Testing 
(Antibody Testing) 
Americas 
Brazil* 
 
 
Southeast Asia 
Bangladesh* 
Bhutan 
India* 
Sri Lanka 
Mexico 
 
Europe 
 
Indonesia** 
Myanmar** 
Nepal* 
Belgium 
Greece 
Italy 
Luxembourg 
Netherlands 
Portugal 
Spain 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Eastern Mediterranean 
Pakistan* 
Saudi Arabia 
Yemen** 
Finland** 
Norway** 
Sweden** 
Kuwait 
Qatar*** 
United Arab Emirates 
Western Pacific 
Philippines 
Malaysia 
Viet Nam 
Australia 
Singapore 
* Microscopy or antigen testing 
** Antigen testing 
*** Selective testing for antigen and antibody 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
88 
More comprehensively testing for some pathogens including malaria, HTLV1+2 and Chagas disease are shown 
below: 
Table 15. Malaria testing policy in several countries 
Americas 
Europe 
Eastern Mediterranean 
Western Pacific 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Canada 
Trinidad and Tobago 
USA 
France 
Greece 
Israel 
Luxembourg* 
Netherlands* 
Norway* 
Portugal* 
Romania 
Spain 
Sweden* 
United Kingdom* 
Iran (Islamic Republic of)* 
Kuwait 
Oman 
Qatar 
Saudi Arabia 
United Arab Emirates 
Australia 
China* 
New Zealand* 
Republic of Korea* 
Viet Nam* 
* Selective testing 
 
Table 16. Testing for Chagas disease 
Test for all donations 
Selective testing 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Mexico 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Belgium 
Italy 
Sweden 
Canada 
Portugal 
Switzerland 
France 
Spain 
USA 
As previously mentioned, more attention is needed, including the standardisation of definitions with regards 
to the hemovigilance programs. As seen below on the map (Figure 20) there are many challenges identified, 
even if such programs are reported to exist in a number of countries. 
 
 
Figure 20. Distribution of countries reporting the existence of national haemovigilance systems, 2018 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
89 
A study was published in 2023 (Transfusion 2023; 63:982-992) which use Vigibase, the WHO global database of 
individual case safety report (ICSRS) and based on the designation of blood by WHO as medicines and hence 
subject to pharmacovigilance reporting between 1968-2021. Despite limitations, the findings suggested a 
significant underreporting of adverse reactions and adverse events from blood products: many countries 
underreport in their national hemovigilance, others use passive report systems, others use different surveillance 
systems with different legal and mandatory reporting requirements or use different case definitions/criteria to 
determine adverse reactions, differences in patient populations amongst other reasons. Although the study 
demonstrated the broad range and high number of adverse reactions and adverse events associated with the 
use of blood products, higher than any other existing hemovigilance data-collection database, further research 
is required as stated by the authors of this study, to characterise and confirm the potential risk of using blood 
products in patients and the rates and incidences of adverse reactions and adverse events. However, 
considerable effort is required at the local, national and international level to raise awareness amongst users 
and healthcare professionals of the importance of considering, identifying and reporting cases of suspected 
adverse reactions and adverse events associated with the use of blood products of human origin, particularly in 
countries from regions including South-East Asia and Eastern Mediterranean, where very few reports were 
observed. 
 
Certainly, several reports, including a comprehensive review of the literature including a Swiss perspective 
published in the Journal of Clinical Medicine 2022 (J. Clin. Med. 2022, 11, 2.859), highlighted the importance of 
detailed documented standardised definitions for adverse events and adverse reactions and the need for 
sensitisation of medical staff to the importance of hemovigilance programs. 
 
In a TIF survey (2020-2024) related to BT therapy with nearly 2,000 (N=1,989) TD patients responding from 28 
LMIC and LICs’, through 32 National Thalassaemia Associations members of TIF, the following patient 
perspectives and challenges were captured: 
 
 
Figure 21. TIF Survey on Blood Transfusion Therapy (2020-2024) 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
90 
In summary, and despite great achievements made in BT services in many countries of the developing 
economies through the years, including disease-specific ones, some of the key challenges that are still 
encountered by many of them include: 
• 
Lack of, limited or underdeveloped centralised Blood Transfusion Services 
• 
Cultural and/or religious beliefs and/or attitudes that can discourage blood donations to a smaller or 
larger extent 
• 
The community at large is not sufficiently and/or appropriately educated on the value and needs for 
blood donations and how these contribute to treatment protocols that are often-lifesaving 
• 
Females in some countries and/or communities are not allowed to or are discouraged from becoming 
blood donors 
• 
Component separation is still weak in many countries and patients with TDT are on occasions deprived 
of red cells, the essential component for their treatment 
• 
Military, private, social security, Red Cross and university blood services, mainly donation, often do not 
cooperate resulting in an inadequate distribution/provision of blood components to needy people 
• 
Suboptimal quality control over every aspect of blood transfusion services leads to transfusion-related 
reactions/adverse events and co-morbidities in a percentage of TDT patients, the exact extent of which 
is largely unknown 
• 
Transportation systems, often in large countries, are inadequate to address the needs of those in 
distant areas far from transfusion centres and/or those in geographical isolation resulting from climate 
conditions, including seasonal flooding. Delivering blood/components/products in a timely manner 
and under appropriate conditions can be and is, very challenging 
• 
Power failures and equipment breakdown resulting mainly, but not only, from restricted or absent 
equipment maintenance 
• 
In many, if not most, of these countries, inadequate financial resources are allocated for strengthening 
blood services and often funds, even when made available, reach provinces/rural areas late and/or are 
inconsistent with the publicly announced allocation. This leads to challenges in establishing 
appropriate processing policies for the BT of TDT patients including routine full antibody screening 
prior to early transfusion, pre-storage or bedside filtering, extended blood groups phenotypes and 
others including appropriate storage of blood. 
• 
Patients are still receiving, on occasion, whole blood and/or “older” age RBC concentrate than that 
recommended in International Guidelines for the appropriate functioning of the transfused RBCs. 
• 
Very importantly the knowledge of patients on the blood transfusion services provided in their country 
and the disease-specific policies (storage, processes etc.), regarding the processing of blood they 
receive is extremely confined across the world. 
 
Furthermore, programmes that could contribute significantly to blood supply savings, including importantly 
the clinical use of blood/ patient management policies, are only in place in very few countries indeed particularly 
of the developing world.  This is mainly due to the lack of relevant and continued educational programmes for 
medical and other healthcare professionals on their value and vast contribution to the saving and sustainability 
of national blood supplies. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
91 
More specifically for the optimal transfusion therapy of TDT additional challenges lie in the lack of, or very 
limited, knowledge and expertise of transfusion professionals. Their knowledge on what safe and effective 
transfusion therapy is for these patients is rather confined; in addition, a lack of adoption and/or adherence to 
the relevant international guidelines by many, if not most, of them is quite the case. Weak patient/parent 
engagement and financial challenges in covering many aspects of their access to transfusion centres and 
services, particularly in those countries devoid of universal health coverage, constitute major additional 
obstacles in the provision of effective transfusion therapy to these patients. 
Most healthcare systems in the developing countries are today in the transition stage of applying universal 
coverage to health services, a very important component of allowing appropriate and timely access of patients 
to quality BT and other medical care. However, the COVID-19 pandemic with its huge public health, social and 
economic repercussions, has indeed greatly delayed this very important change across these countries. 
 
Regional Snapshot 
Looking at the situation with regards to BT services in each Region separately (except AFR where TIF has an 
extremely confined number of members) and based on available data, the vast heterogeneity in the quality of 
these services becomes even more evident. Many and multiple challenges are faced by TDT patients in 
accessing effective and safe transfusion therapy within and across countries of the different regions of the 
world. Below is a snapshot of TIF’s membership across the 6 WHO Regions (Figure 22, Table 17). 
 
 
Figure 22. TIF’s members: 157 National Thalassaemia Associations members in 64 countries 
TIF National Thalassaemia Association members per WHO Region
AFR
PAH
SEAR
EUR
EMR
WPR
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
92 
Table 17. Breakdown of TIF’s members per region (according to WHO division of region) 
Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) 
European Region (EUR) 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Afghanistan 
3 
Morocco 
2 
Albania 
1 
Italy 
6 
Bahrain  
1 
Pakistan 
21 
Azerbaijan 
2 
Luxembourg  
1 
Egypt  
2 
Saudi 
Arabia 
3 
Belgium 
1 
Malta 
1 
Iran (Islamic 
Rep. of) 
3 
Sudan 
1 
Bulgaria 
2 
Netherlands  
1 
Iraq  
5 
Tunisia 
1 
Cyprus 
1 
Portugal  
1 
Jordan  
1 
United 
Arab 
Emirates 
2 
France 
2 
Romania 
2 
Kuwait  
1 
West Bank 
& Gaza 
Strip 
1 
Germany 
3 
Spain 
1 
Lebanon  
1 
Yemen 
1 
Greece 
3 
Sweden 
1 
Total: 49 members in 16 countries 
Ireland 
1 
Turkey 
5 
South-East Asia Region (SEAR) 
Israel 
2 
United 
Kingdom 
3 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Total: 38 members in 21 countries 
Bangladesh 
5 
Nepal 
1 
Region for the Americas (PAH) 
India 
24 
Sri Lanka 
2 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Indonesia 
1 
Thailand 
1 
Argentina 
2 
Trinidad & 
Tobago 
1 
Brazil 
1 
Maldives 
2 
Canada 
2 
USA 
1 
Total: 36 members in 7 countries 
Total: 7 members in 5 countries 
Western Pacific Region (WPR) 
African Region (AFR) 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Country 
No. of TIF 
Members 
Australia 
2 
New 
Zealand 
1 
Algeria 
2 
Nigeria 
1 
Cambodia 
1 
Philippines 
2 
Congo 
1 
China* 
6 
Singapore 
1 
Ghana 
1 
South 
Africa 
1 
Indonesia 
1 
Viet Nam 
1 
Malaysia 
4 
Mauritius 
2 
Total: 19 members in 9 countries 
Total: 8 members in 6 countries 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
93 
“CAPTURING” THE SITUATION BY REGION 
Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) 
This Region includes 22 countries with a population of 664,336,000 people. 
49 National Thalassaemia Associations from 16 countries of the Region are members of TIF, promoting and 
advocating for the rights of more than 70% of the EMR thalassaemic population for access to quality health, 
social and other care specific for their disease. 
The 34th session of WHO Regional Committee that took place in 1987 for the Eastern Mediterranean Region, 
endorsed resolution EM/RC 34/R.9 which focused on the development of national blood transfusion services in 
the countries of the Region. Significant challenges, however, remain to-date despite the great progress made 
through the years in providing access to sufficient, affordable and sustainable supplies for blood and blood 
products. Ensuring the quality and safety of these products in the presence of known and emerging threats to 
public health has been a major challenge and in response, a strategic framework for blood safety and availability 
was endorsed by the 63rd session of the Regional Committee in 2016 in Resolution EM/RC63/R.6 for the years 
2016-2025. 
 
Blood Adequacy in the Region 
Today only about 6% of the global blood supply is collected in the Region, which comprises about 10% of the 
world’s population and which includes many countries with high haemoglobin disorders’ prevalence that rely 
on blood transfusion therapy, lifelong regularly (or periodically). Approximately 30% of the countries in the 
Region, including countries with a high prevalence of haemoglobin disorders, have insufficient or unsustainable 
national blood supplies.  
Blood donation rates range from 2.8 to 24 per 1,000 population per year, with a median of 12.1 per 1,000. A little 
over 30% of the countries (i.e. 5 out of 16) are collecting less than 10 whole blood donations per 1,000 
population. These countries are the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Afghanistan, Jordan, and Morocco. To 
underscore the heterogeneity of the situation one of the countries in this Region, Iran which is in addition a 
WHO Collaborating Centre in Transfusion Medicine, reports 24 donations per 1,000 population.  
The data in the tables below was taken from the “Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 2021” 
published by the World Health Organization: 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
94 
 
Table 18. Blood Centres & Data Coverage in EMR (2018) 
From the data collected to-date, only the blood banks of Pakistan, Bahrain, UAE reflect more than 80% of the 
total blood collected. The rest of the countries give very confined data and Egypt reported data from 28 blood 
centres that reflect only 33% of the country’s blood donations. 
Table 19. Blood Donations in EMR (2018) 
 
Stand-alone Hospital-based Total Stand-alone Hospital-based Total
Afghanistan
1
288
289
1
101
102
Syria
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Egypt
28
…
…
28
0
28
33
Iran
91
0
91
91
0
91
Lebanon
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Morocco
6
11
17
6
11
17
Pakistan
…
…
…
120
486
606
95
Tunisia
7
25
32
7
25
32
Iraq
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Jordan
4
37
41
1
0
1
…
Bahrain
0
3
3
1
1
90
Kuwait
1
0
1
1
0
1
Oman
1
15
16
1
12
13
81.2
Qatar
1
0
1
1
0
1
Saudi Arabia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
UAE
5
7
12
4
7
11
93
BLOOD CENTRES & DATA COVERAGE (2018)
Number of Blood Centres
In the Country
Number of Blood Centres
Covered By The Report
High Income (HIC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
Blank (in the last column) : 100%
/ : No response
Estimated
% of Blood 
Donations
… : Not reported/not available
Country
Low Income (LIC)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
VNRD
VNRD from 1st
time donors
VNRD from
repeat donor
Family/replacement
donations
Paid
donations
Others
Total
% of
VNRD
% of family/ 
replacement
% of paid 
donations
Blood donations 
per 1,000
Afghanistan
82 904
…
…
127 723
0
0
210 627
39.40%
60.60%
0.00%
5.7
Syria
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Egypt
305 718
300 000
5 718
121 142
426 860
71.60%
28.40%
4.0
Iran
2 069 273
245 412
1 823 861
0
0
0
2 069 273
100%
0%
0%
24.0
Lebanon
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
23.2
Morocco
298 842
…
…
22 494
0
0
321 336
93%
7%
0%
9.0
Pakistan
410 599
…
…
1 903 709
2 314 308
17.70%
82.30%
10.2
Tunisia
56 795
…
…
164 009
0
0
220 804
25.70%
74.30%
0.00%
18.8
Iraq
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
14.6
Jordan
35 652
24 244
11 408
29 171
0
0
64 823
55%
45%
0%
6.2
Bahrain
19 546
…
…
0
0
19 546
100%
0%
0%
13.0
Kuwait
43 467
14 278
29 189
34 564
0
0
78 031
55.70%
44.30%
0.00%
18.0
Oman
51 615
25 625
25 990
5 792
0
57 407
89.90%
10.10%
0.00%
12.5
Qatar
30 209
12 952
17 257
26
0
0
30 235
99.90%
0.10%
0.00%
11.7
Saudi Arabia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
16.2
UAE
120 320
73 070
47 250
2 565
4 361
0
127 246
94.60%
2%
3%
2.8
VNRD : Voluntary non-remunerated donations
No. Whole Blood Donations Collected (excluding autologous donations)
Low Income (LIC)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
… : Not reported/not available
Blank : Not required/not applicable
BLOOD DONATIONS (2018)
Country
/ : No response
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
95 
Table 20. Clinical Use of Blood & Blood Components in EMR 
 
 
Table 21. Policy, Governance, Quality Assurance and Monitoring in EMR (2017/8) 
 
 
 
 
Whole blood Red cells
Whole blood
derived platelets
Apheresis
platelets
Fresh frozen 
plasma
Plasma Cryo-precipitate
Afghanistan
2018
…
179 878
14 340
12 959
0
3 381
0
69
Syria
2015
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Egypt
2018
…
1 276
411 288
91 907
20 816
311 797
17 129
76 620
Units issued
Iran
2018
929
3 779
1 962 214
906 420
20 958
661 378
11 756
128 337
Units issued
Lebanon
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Morocco
2018
633
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Pakistan
2018
606
921 204
735 678
304 448
…
…
450 316
49 703
Units issued
Tunisia
2018
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Iraq
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Jordan
2018
113
61 997
61 997
…
…
…
…
…
Units issued
Bahrain
2018
17
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Kuwait
2018
43
0
91 455
0
…
…
…
101 320
Units issued
Oman
2018
18
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Qatar
2018
28
27
25 373
20 012
843
6 120
3 072
3 300
Units transfused
Saudi Arabia
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
UAE
2018
…
0
108 709
19 625
9 585
32 238
1 000
6 701
Units issued
* 1 unit of blood component is defined as the preparation from whole blood donations of 450 ml
** 1 unit of apheresis platelets usually contains 200 - 450 x 10 000 000 000 platelets 
… : Not reported/not available
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
CLINICAL USE OF BLOOD & BLOOD COMPONENTS
No. Units of Blood Components Issued/Transfused
(excluding autologous blood units)
No. Hospitals
Performing
Blood 
Transfusion
Country
Date Year
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Low Income (LIC)
High Income (HIC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
Afghanistan
Yes
Yes
No
…
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Syria
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Egypt
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Iran
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Lebanon*
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Morocco
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Pakistan
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Tunisia
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
…
Iraq*
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
…
No
Jordan
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Bahrain
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Kuwait
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Oman
Yes
Yes
…
…
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Qatar
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Saudi Arabia*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
UAE
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
…
Yes
…
… : Not reported/not available
/ : No response
Blank : Not required/not applicable
POLICY, GOVERNANCE, QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING (2017/18)
Country
Unit within MoH with 
responsibility for governing 
blood provision & 
transfusion activities
National 
Blood 
Policy
Multiyear national 
strategic plan for 
blood safety or 
equivalent
Specific Legislation
Covering the Safety & 
Quality Of Blood And Blood 
Products for Transfusion
National Blood 
Committee
(or equivalent)
Specific Government 
Budgetary Line Item 
For The NBTS/BTS
System of 
Cost 
Recovery for 
NBTS/BTS
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
National standards for the 
collection, testing processing, 
storage & distributuion of blood 
and blood components
National Guidelines 
On The Appropriate 
Clinical Use Of Blood
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
Low Income (LIC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
96 
TIF’s Perspective In The Region  
Information compiled by TIF in 2018 (Jan-Dec) from 350 patients of 20 member associations, and in 2024 (Jan-
Dec) from 210 patients of 16 member associations, and in the context of a questionnaire/survey distributed to 
18 countries, members of TIF in the Region, identified some key needs of patients in accessing optimal 
transfusion therapy. Despite the fact that this is a Region with significant focus for some decades now, 
prioritising haemoglobin disorders, with both thalassaemia and SCD on their national health agendas, the 
information below warrants attention and calls for urgent improvements in the area of BT services. Patients are 
reporting that: 
 
 
Southeast Asia Region (SEAR) 
This Region includes 11 countries (Bangladesh, Bhutan, Korea, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste) with a population of 1,947,632,000 people. 
27 National Thalassaemia Associations from 7 countries of the Region are members of TIF (Bangladesh, India, 
Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand). 
Together with the Western Pacific Region (WPR) they represent the countries where more than 80% of patients 
with haemoglobin disorders - thalassaemia syndromes (α and β) and SCD (outside Africa), and combined forms 
of these - are born and live. This is the part of the world where >90% of α- and β-thalassaemia and HbE (and 
combined forms of these) exist with variable clinical severity and dependence on transfusion therapy. These 
forms were previously referred to as intermediate forms or thalassaemia intermedia with regard to their milder 
clinical outcome and in more recent years have been grouped under the designation of non-transfusion 
dependent thalassaemias (NTDT). Some of these, nevertheless, need occasional BT or may at some point 
convert to totally transfusion-dependent forms. 
The availability of blood across the countries of this Region varies considerably and varies even within a country. 
Red cell units range from 33.15 (in Thailand) to 2.56 (Timor-Leste) per 1,000 population. 
• 
From 48.2% in 2018, in 2024 38.6% are receiving inadequate in amount and/or interrupted or 
belated transfusion therapy. 
• 
From 52.8% in 2018, in 2024 58.2% have pre-transfusion haemoglobin level throughout the year 
of ≤ 90 g/l (80-90 g/l average 88 g/l), 32.6% of whom <80 g/l (75-80 g/l – average 78 g/l. 
• 
From 38.6% in 2018, in 2024 26.4% are receiving red cell concentrates, on average 4 times a year, 
that were not always pre-storage or bedside filtered.  
• 
From 86.4% in 2018, in 2024 72.6% were not aware of the way the blood provided to them was 
processed, stored or transported. 
• 
From 62.8% in 2018, in 2024 75.6% received blood more than 14 days old. 
• 
From 62.4% in 2018, in 2024 70.9% are involved in family/friends’ campaigns to donate blood.  
• 
From 18.6% in 2018, in 2024 12.8% had received at least once whole blood transfusion in the 
previous year, 6.4% of whom reported receiving whole blood transfusions. 
• 
Foreign patients mainly migrant workers or refugees or displaced individuals in this Region (of 
whom there are very large numbers [9]) anticipate many challenges in timely accessing 
appropriate BT therapy. For example, Jordan with a population of 6.6 million hosts 3 million 
refugees from Iran, the West Bank and Gaza strip and Syrian Arab Republic while Lebanon with 
a population of 4.5 million, hosts 1.5-2 million refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
97 
Four (4) countries, Thailand, Maldives, Sri Lanka and Indonesia, have more than 10 red cells units available per 
1,000 population annually and these are countries with high prevalence of thalassaemia syndromes. In other 
countries, also with high prevalence of TDT patients including India, Bangladesh and Myanmar, significant 
challenges in blood supplies are anticipated, albeit published data are lacking. In addition, many countries of 
this Region face other types of challenges: Maldives and Nepal for example face geographical constraints 
whereas India, Thailand and Indonesia are challenged with large and diverse populations and/or large distances 
coupled, in some instances, with frequent climatic disasters. Altogether, these play an important role in making 
blood difficult to access for these patients at time intervals recommended for their needs, even when, and if, 
blood is available and appropriately processed. The under-5 mortality rates, to which haemoglobin disorders 
contribute significantly in these parts of the world, and which reflect to a great extent the quality of healthcare 
provided in a country, is less than 10% in only three (3) countries (v. Sri Lanka, Thailand and Maldives) and 
reaches rates of more than 20% in others (v. Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Myanmar and Nepal). 
Haemoglobin disorders have been acknowledged as one of the non-communicable diseases (NCD) priorities in 
most countries of both Regions in the last 15-20 years. Important research work and disease-specific 
programmes and policies since then have been promoted in many of these countries, including strengthening 
of blood supply and access to safe and effective chelation and other aspects of holistic management including 
social care. To-date however, there is still lack of national coordination, in some more than in the others, and 
lack of adequate funding in most of them for both the areas of the control of these disorders, namely prevention 
and management (including transfusion therapy, which constitute the cornerstone of effective management). 
The estimated number of annual births with β-thalassaemia in this Region is roughly 20,420 with about 
50% (nearly 10,000) being TDT, notwithstanding the fact that in the absence of national registries and 
updated epidemiological studies these numbers are considered inaccurate and a gross underestimation. 
Looking at the prevailing situation in some countries individually and mainly those with high prevalence of 
thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders, including SCD, the challenges in addressing effectively BT 
therapy of these disorders are made truly evident. 
The data in the tables below was taken from the “Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 2021” 
published by the World Health Organization: 
 
Table 22. Blood Centres & Data Coverage in SEAR (2018) 
 
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Bangladesh
54
288
342
3
87
90
90
India
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Indonesia
222
198
420
212
159
371
78.2
Myanmar
1
391
392
1
155
156
95
Nepal
70
38
108
70
38
108
Sri Lanka
2
101
103
2
101
103
Maldives
1
21
22
1
20
21
95
Thailand
13
160
173
13
0
13
41.9
BLOOD CENTRES & DATA COVERAGE (2018)
Blank Cell (in the last column) : 100%
Country
Number of Blood Centres
In the Country
Number of Blood Centres
Covered By The Report
Estimated
% of Blood
Donations
… : Not reported/not available
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
98 
Table 23. Blood Donations in SEAR (2018) 
 
 
Table 24. Laboratory Test Requirements for Screening Donated Blood for Transfusion-Transmissible Infections in 
SEAR (2017/8) 
 
 
 
VNRD
VNRD from 1st
time donors
VNRD from
repeat donor
Family/replacement
donations
Paid
donations
Others
Total
% of
VNRD
% of family/ 
replacement
% of paid 
donations
Blood donations 
per 1,000
Bangladesh
171 000
…
...
590 115
0
761 115 
22.50%
77.50%
0.00%
4.7
India
9 424 000
…
…
2 976 000
0
12 400 000
76%
24%
0%
9.0
Indonesia
3 480 051
989 612
2 490 439
327 097
14 567
3 821 715
91%
8.60%
0.40%
14.2
Myanmar
96 018
41 305
54 713
921
0
0
96 939
99.00%
1.00%
0.00%
1.9
Nepal
225 696
67 708
157 988
46 226
0
0
271 922
83%
17%
0%
9.7
Sri Lanka
450 640
…
…
0
0
0
450 640
100%
0%
0%
20.8
Maldives
2 335
852
1 483
4 131
0
6 466
36.10%
63.90%
0.00%
13.7
Thailand
1 112 497
152 536
959 961
0
0
0
1 112 497
100.00%
0%
0%
15.6
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
No. Whole Blood Donations Collected (excluding autologous donations)
… : Not reported/not available
Blank Cell : Not required/not applicable
BLOOD DONATIONS (2018)
Country
VNRD : Voluntary non-remunerated donations
Ab
Others
Smear
microscopy
Ag
Others
Ab
Others
Bangladesh
Y
India*
Y
Y
Indonesia
S
Myanmar
S
Nepal
S
Sri Lanka
Y
Maldives
Thailand
Y : Required for all donations
S : Required for selected donations
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
LABORATORY TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR SCREENING DONATED
BLOOD FOR TRANSFUSION-TRANSMISSIBLE INFECTIONS  (2017/18)
Country
Chagas disease
Malaria
HTLV-1/2
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, data of earlier years were listed in the table
Blank : Not required/not applicable
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
99 
Table 25. Number & Proportion of Donations Tested Positive/Reactive for TTI Markers in SEAR (2018) 
 
 
Table 26. Clinical Use of Blood & Blood Components in SEAR (2018) 
 
 
 
Positive/reactive, no.
No. donations tested
%*
Bangladesh
77
761 115
0.01
India
…
…
0.14
Indonesia
11 791
3 813 871
0.31
Myanmar
879
457 657
0.19
Nepal
113
271 922
0.04
Sri Lanka
29
450 640
0.006
Maldives
5
6 562
0.08
Thailand
821
1 122 497
0.07
… : Not reported/not available
* Proportion, expressed as positive/reactive per 100 donations tested
NUMBER & PROPORTION OF DONATIONS TESTED POSITIVE/REACTIVE FOR TTI 
MARKERS (2018)
Country
HIV 1+2
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Whole blood
Red cells
Whole blood
derived platelets
Apheresis
platelets
Fresh frozen 
plasma
Plasma
Cryo-precipitate
Bangladesh
342
761 115
84 465
34 495
20
59 481
10
113
Units issued
India
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Indonesia
…
521 337
2 741 680
597 706
12 457
113 005
24 681
14 910
Units transfused
Myanmar
391
36 470
56 212
10 098
8
38 506
2 137
2 564
Units issued
Nepal
…
20 500
68 000
42 000
…
20 000
1 000
1 000
Units issued
Sri Lanka
103
0
412 154
134 059
17 682
156 512
…
48 622
Units issued
Maldives
91
…
6 390
0
0
…
0
0
Units issued
Thailand
1 332
0
1 049 777
428 189
13 448
215 837
562
235 027
Units issued
** 1 unit of apheresis platelets usually contains 200 - 450 x 10 000 000 000 platelets 
Country
No. Hospitals
Performing
Blood Tranfusion
No. Units of Blood Components Issued/Transfused
(excluding autologous blood units)
* 1 unit of blood component is defined as the preparation from whole blood donations of 450 ml
CLINICAL USE OF BLOOD & BLOOD COMPONENTS (2018)
… : Not reported/not available
Blank : Not required/not applicable
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
100 
Table 27. Policy, Governance, Quality Assurance and Monitoring in SEAR (2017/8) 
 
In BANGLADESH (Lower Middle-Income country), with an estimated prevalence of thalassaemia patients of 
60,000 – 70,000, the Annual Blood Donations (2017) are estimated to be 756,061 (i.e. 4.82 red cell units per 1,000 
population). There is no centralized blood collection system. Blood banks belong to a combination of 
government and private services (80%), the Red Cross Society (11%), voluntary institutions (5%) and to private 
organisations (4%). Blood collection is based on about 70% replacement and less than 30% on voluntary 
practices. The Safe Blood Transfusion Program (SBTP), a unit of the Ministry of health supports 203 centres by 
providing equipment, regular supply of kits, reagents, blood bags and training. 66.8% (169) of blood transfusion 
centres belonging to the public sector are integrated within the hospitals and located in seven divisions in the 
country. A situation assessment was carried out in 2011 by experts of blood transfusion and program 
management personnel of Directorate General of Health Service under the Ministry of Health in collaboration 
with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID). Findings 
of this assessment include a significant shortage of trained staff in each centre and inadequate premises, 
supplies and equipment. [Situation Assessment of Public and Private Blood Centres in Bangladesh. World 
Health Organization 2012] To what extent the situation has improved since that report is uncertain. However, 
HCV, HBV and HIV were 13.51%, 3.37% and 0%, respectively. Moreover, 2% of the patients were found to be co-
infected with both HBV and HCV [Bhuyan GS, Noor AUZ, Sultana R, Noor FA, Sultana N, Sarker SK, Islam MT, 
Sayeed MA, Khabir MIU, Hossain AKME, Zeba Z, Qadri SK, Siddique MRF, Qadri SS, Qadri F, Mannoor K. 
Frequency of Hepatitis B, C and HIV Infections among Transfusion-Dependent Beta Thalassemia Patients in 
Dhaka. Infect Dis Rep. 2021 Jan 15;13(1):89-95. doi: 10.3390/idr13010011. PMID: 33467675] 
Blood legislation was put forward in April 2002 and National Guidelines for Thalassaemia have existed since 
2019, albeit no data exist with regards to nationwide disease specific survival, morbidity and mortality rates and 
consequently no information is available on the age distribution of patients. Despite immense efforts being 
made through the years, mainly on behalf of healthcare professionals and patient organisations, clinical 
management and social care remain largely suboptimal. In addition, a nationally coordinated prevention 
programme is still not in place, leading to large numbers of annual affected births that add significantly to the 
burden of transfusion, medical and other care of the country. 
 
INDIA (Lower Middle-Income country) is a subcontinent with a population 1,380,004,385 people (17.7% of the 
total global population). It has an estimated prevalence of patients with TDT of 150,000 with a predicted annual 
number of affected births of 12,500. It is evident that the challenges to addressing timely and effective BT 
therapy, medical and other care of patients with these disorders across this hugely multi-ethnic large, densely 
populated country are many and multiple. The deficiencies are magnified each year acknowledging the fact 
that to-date and despite the huge work undertaken by the government, healthcare professionals’ and patient 
organisations in the last three decades, there is no nationally coordinated effective prevention programme in 
place. Annual Blood Donations (2017 – 2018) are 11,100,000 i.e. 7.69 red cell units/1,000. 
Bangladesh
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
India*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Indonesia
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Myanmar
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Nepal
Yes
Yes
…
…
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sri Lanka
Yes
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Maldives
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Thailand
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
… : Not reported/not available
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
POLICY, GOVERNANCE, QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING (2017/18)
Multiyear national 
strategic plan for 
blood safety or 
equivalent
Specific Legislation Covering 
the Safety & Quality Of Blood 
And Blood Products for 
Transfusion
National Blood 
Committee
(or equivalent)
Specific Government 
Budgetary Line Item 
For The NBTS/BTS
System of 
Cost Recovery 
for NBTS/BTS
National standards for the 
collection, testing processing, 
storage & distributuion of blood 
and blood components
National Guidelines On 
The Appropriate 
Clinical Use Of Blood
Country
Unit within MoH with 
responsibility for governing 
blood provision & 
transfusion activities
National 
Blood 
Policy
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
101 
An estimated 2 million units/year of packed red cells are needed to address the needs of TDT in the country, 
based on current estimates.  
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Blood Cell National Health Mission in 2016 developed Guidelines 
for the Management and Prevention of Thalassaemia and significant steps towards improvement have indeed 
been achieved including in the area of blood transfusion therapy.  
From 2,626 functional blood banks across the country identified in 2016 by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, 76% were public and not-for-profit owned and 24% were owned by the private sector. However, 61% 
of these were situated in 8 states, out of which only 2, (Maharashtra and Gujarat) have a high thalassaemia 
prevalence. 
The blood banks / million population in high thalassaemia prevalence states, including Uttar Pradesh (1.2), West 
Bengal (1.3), Rajasthan (1.5), Chhattisgarh (2), is less than the national average of 2.2 blood banks / 1,000,000 
population. It was estimated in 2017 that the annual collection was 11.1 million units of blood while the demand 
was 14.6 million units. Moreover, only 12.6 % and 11.2% of blood banks have actually enrolled in External 
Quality Control Systems (EQAS) for immunohematology and TTIs respectively. The mean assessment score 
was very low = < 35 (contrary to 62 for most) in Uttar Pradesh (which has 13 blood banks and constituting 5% of 
all blood banks), followed by Odisha (with 3 blood banks constituting 4% of all blood banks). Of the annual 
blood collection from all blood banks in 2015, which was 11.645.79, around 70% (71.9%) units were collected by 
VNRBD practices. 
In the context of voluntary donations practices, the percentage of repeat donors ranges between 0–30% only 
(as opposed >90% in the EU), a component that undoubtably needs strengthening. 
Although the average annual collection of blood units per 100 individuals was reported to be <1% (meeting 
WHO’s requirements), yet the great challenge as reported by TIF member National Thalassaemia Associations 
and treating physicians, lies in the huge disparity in collection and distribution between States; an element 
present in many countries lacking comprehensive and centralised national coordination of blood supplies. 
However, in 2014 the National Blood Cell under the National Health Mission (NHM), launched by the 
government of India, set up a mission to ensure accessibility, adequacy, safety and quality of blood across the 
country  with planning, networking and developing new policies including: (1) the establishment of 1,599 blood 
storage units, (2) the setting up of new blood banks (74 in 89 districts that did not have one), (3) strengthening 
blood collection and voluntary donation practices, and (4) promoting regular quality assessment tools including 
the investment in a comprehensive Network of Blood Banks and Blood Storage Units which will facilitate real 
time blood stock availability. There is not comprehensive published update on the progress of this. 
With regards to TDT patients, the National Blood Transfusion Council (NBTC) issued laws for the provision of 
free blood to all thalassaemia patients since 2014 and furthermore published National Guidelines on the 
management and prevention of haemoglobin disorders in 2016; moreover thalassaemia has been included in 
the context of its disability legislation – an important contribution to addressing the traveling expenses to 
transfusion units amongst other benefits. However, many challenges are still seen to-date with regards to the 
access of TDT patients to free and optimal transfusion therapies and adequate quality blood. Certainly, more 
accurate and reliable data are needed at a nationwide level to assess more accurately the level of the 
effectiveness of BT therapy for TD patients across the country both in terms of availability and quality of blood. 
Data available today derive from small or large groups of patients in centres/hospitals/clinics in one or more 
States and are consequent to the work and interest of some medical/scientific specialists. As such, the data do 
not reflect to any extent the nationwide picture. Even so, TIF’s data demonstrate huge inequalities across the 
country with patients reporting as having timely access to optimal transfusion therapy mainly in larger / capital 
cities, while in rural areas and certain States which have a high prevalence of these disorders, are more likely to 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
102 
receive irregular, not appropriately processed and even whole blood. Despite truly impressive efforts and newly 
developed legislation and recommendations by governments and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in 
the last 15-20 years, that have been strengthened even more in more recent years, patients are still struggling 
to an extent that is not well defined to obtain free transport to treatment centres and free treatment, including 
every aspect of BT services. There are areas of very high prevalence of haemoglobin disorders for which there 
is an almost total absence of any reliable data, and this is the first and biggest problem most of the countries 
are facing: lack of national data due to absence of disease-specific national registries. 
In a recent article Dr JS Arora ( general secretary at National Thalassemia Welfare Society & Federation of Indian 
Thalassemics) a well-known physician in the field of thalassaemia, pointed out that  there have been two recent 
cases in 2022,  the first, one in Nagpur where four children, suffering from Thalassemia, became Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus(HIV) infection positive, allegedly after blood transfusion; the other report was from 
Hyderabad where a three-year-old thalassaemic patient allegedly contracted HIV after receiving blood. He 
concludes that such instances call for the immediate attention of government and advocacy groups to work 
together and ensure better blood screening and testing standards so that every patient gets safe blood and 
lives a healthy life, advocating appropriate technologies like NAT testing [https://www.firstpost.com/opinion-
news-expert-views-news-analysis-firstpost-viewpoint/how-india-has-still-a-long-way-to-go-to-ensure-blood-
safety-11…]. The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has recently released the updated edition of the 
National Standards for Blood Centres and Blood Transfusion Services, incorporating the developments in the 
blood collection, storage and transfusion technologies. The main issue, which plagues blood banking system in 
the country, is fragmented management. The standards vary from State to State, cities to cities and centre to 
centre in the same city. There is also shortage of trained healthcare professionals in the field of transfusion 
medicine. 
INDONESIA (Upper Middle-Income country) has a population of 273,523,615 people contributing to 3.51% of 
the global population. It has an estimated prevalence of thalassaemia of 10,531/100,000 population and Annual 
Blood Donations (2017) reaching 2,886,233 (i.e. 11.18 red cell units/1,000 population).  
Thalassaemia syndromes constitute one of the NCD priorities in the healthcare system of Indonesia and truly 
exemplary work has been done through the years by the government, healthcare professionals and the patient 
community mainly in the area of BT and clinical care and less on a national prevention programme.  
The free healthcare of TDT patients has been included in the burden package of the government health 
insurance programme for the poor (JAMKESMAS) since 2010 and the National Health Insurance programme 
since 2014. National guidelines for the management of TDT have been available since 2012 and adherence to 
them across the country, despite geographical challenges, has gradually been improving. 
The Indonesian Red Cross or government hospitals are responsible for blood centres and 80% of blood 
donations are based on VNRBD practices while the rest rely on replacement and, occasionally, paid donation 
practices. The major challenges faced by TDT patients include: (i) adequacy of blood supplies, (ii) unequal 
distribution of blood supplies and (iii) timely access of patients to BT services, particularly in rural areas. 
Although 4.5 million blood units are targeted annually as per estimated needs, only about 50% are actually 
collected. The collection of the rest has to rely mainly on families and friends, and on occasion on paid 
donations; the latter usually occurring in the 34 remote areas. For example, under normal circumstances Jakarta 
has an excess of units; in 2014 for example it had 60% excess supplies whereas at the same time there was a 
96.3% blood shortage in West Papua. Such a heterogeneous situation culminates, as expected, in great 
inequalities in terms of access of patients to their appropriate and timely care. 
MALDIVES (Upper Middle-Income country) has a population of 540,544 people (0.01% of the global 
population). It has an estimated prevalence of patients (2017) of 861/100,000 population (mainly TDT) and 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
103 
Annual Blood Donations (2017) reaching 12,652 (i.e. 2,759 red cell units available per 100,000 population, i.e. 
27.59 per 1000 population.  
Maldives is a country with a long history in recognizing the need to effectively address the control of 
thalassaemia being an island with one of the highest carrier rates globally (>17%). There has been strong 
government support and patient/parent engagement in promoting disease-specific policies since the early 
1990s. 
The National Thalassaemia Centre and the National Blood Transfusion Services merged in 2012 to form the 
Maldives Blood Services. All thalassaemia patients receive free BT services, medical and other care. However, 
70–80% of blood supplies come from family replacement donors while only 10-30% of the donors are 
volunteers; no paid donations are reported to occur. There are only a few other blood banks on the other islands 
outside Male, but with a very poor networking between them. 
The major challenges include the blood donation practices that need to undergo transition to regular, voluntary 
ones and the weak blood bank system that needs national coordination, particularly in terms of strengthening 
networking between the blood banks across the many small islands and the main one in Male. There is sufficient 
medical expertise in the Maldives and a great focus is given on continuously improving the quality of medical 
care including BT therapy to all patients across the country, albeit no national data exist on survival rates and/or 
age distribution of its patients. 
MYANMAR (Lower Middle-Income country) has a population of 54,409,800 and contributes 0.70% of the global 
population. Annual blood donations reached 170,743 in 2017 with red blood cell units available per 100,000 
reaching 323, i.e. 3.23/1000 population. A high under-5 mortality rate was reported in 2018 reaching 47.2 per 
1,000 live births. It is a country with a very rough estimation of ~4,000 patients with thalassaemia. HbE/β-
thalassaemia accounts for 46-58% of the haemoglobin disorders, β-thalassaemia for 5.4 to 22% and α-
thalassaemia for 6-37%. It has a “national blood and blood products law” since 2003 and a nationally 
coordinated blood transfusion service. 
There are 359 hospital blood banks with an annual demand of 200,000 units of blood which exceeds its collected 
blood supplies. Voluntary donation practices are reported to have increased to 85% but blood shortages for 
thalassaemia patients still constitute an important challenge. A report in 2019 on World Blood Donation Day 
mentions that the National Blood Bank was short of about 600 blood transfusions that were needed for 
patients every day. 
There are no published data on survival and age distribution of patients with haemoglobin disorders in this 
country as is the situation in many other countries across all six Regions of the world. These disorders do not 
constitute a priority on its national health agenda to-date; neither has any disease-specific policy nor 
programme been developed and it is likely that high rates of morbidity and mortality occur in this country 
amongst patients with haemoglobin disorders and the challenges, including access to adequate supplies of 
appropriately processed blood/red cells, are truly immense. 
NEPAL (Lower Middle-Income country) has a population of 29,136,808 people (0.37% of the global population). 
Nepal has an estimated 250-300 patients (currently known to be under treatment) with thalassaemia and has 
annual donations (2017 – 2018) of nearly 240,000 units, being 7.90 red cell units per 1,000 population. It has a 
high under-5 mortality rate of 32.2 per 1,000 live births (2018), to which thalassaemia potentially contributes 
significantly. The national blood policy, approved in 1991, was revised in 2006 and 2012 and draft Guidelines for 
the Management of Thalassaemia and SCD by the Ministry of Health were issued in 2017. More than 80% of 
blood is collected through VNRBDs albeit replacement donations are still in practice to a certain extent and 
according to needs. Of a total of 113 blood transfusion establishment services only 13 blood banks have 
component services and many of the 50 of the 77 districts that have blood transfusion centres lack quality 
standards. Thus, patients have to travel long distances to access safe blood transfusions, mainly to Kathmandu. 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
104 
Consequently, in this country timely access to adequate and quality BT services constitutes a major challenge 
with >75% of the patients (76.8%) in TIF’s data (2018 survey) reporting as struggling to keep pre-transfusion 
haemoglobin level >70 g/l and nearly 15% of the patients who responded (14.8%) reported receiving, at 
least once a year, whole blood instead of red cells (TIF’s 2018 data). No data however exist in published 
reports on survival rates or age distribution to assess the extent of the weaknesses of the country to respond 
effectively to the control and management of this disease, including the huge gaps that exist in the 
effectiveness of BT services for these patients (the number of whom in the absence of prevention is 
exponentially increasing). 
SRI LANKA (Lower Middle-Income country) has population of 21,413,249 people (0.27% of the global 
population). It is a country with an estimated 2,000 TD patients (and more irregularly transfused) and with 
annual blood donations (2018) of nearly 500,000 units, reflecting 19.24 red cell units per 1,000 population. It has 
a very low under-5 mortality rate (2018). Replacement donation practices constituted the main source of blood 
although this is rapidly changing, but no published report gives a reliable update of the progress. Since 1995, 4 
regional centres across the country have started providing free of charge blood (based on VNRBD practices) 
and chelation therapy to TDT patients. However, these do not cover the needs of all patients across the country 
and a national programme is in need to effectively include the appropriate care of all patients across the 
country. 
Sri Lanka has one of the best nationally coordinated Blood Transfusion Services in South Asia, established 
back in 1999 and designated by the WHO as a Collaborating Centre in 2018. There is no stand-alone blood 
bank in the NGO or private sector. 60-70% of donations are separated into components and the goal is to 
achieve VNRBD practices for 100% of the donations.  
Despite these advances it was reported by treating experts that over 60% of TDT and a percent of previously 
NTDT patients but now transfusion dependant do not maintain levels of pre-transfusion haemoglobin of more 
than 90 g/l (which is the international recommendation) despite being transfused regularly and with apparently 
adequate amounts. Further research is warranted to identify the causes. 
Sri Lankan governments, healthcare professionals and researchers have done considerable work in improving 
their medical and public health services for addressing this disorder through the years, albeit the patient 
population in the country, from the existing very limited published information, is still very young, suggesting 
that high rates of mortality due to inadequate medical care are occurring. 
THAILAND (Upper Middle-Income country) has a population of 69,799,978 people (0.90% of the global 
population). It is estimated that nearly 100,000 patients with thalassaemia major live in Thailand, together with 
a very large number of NTDT patients collectively reaching over 400,000 in total, as reported by national 
treating experts, a proportion of whom at some point in time will become transfusion dependent. The country 
reports annual blood donations of 2,341,571 (2017) reflecting 33.15 red cell units per 1,000 and has very low 
under-5 mortality rate (2018) thus reflecting a good quality healthcare and public health infrastructure. The 
prevalence of α-thalassaemia is between 5.5 - 30%, β-thalassaemia between 1 - 9% and HbE between 5 - 50%. 
At present, there are 12 Regional Blood Centres with branches in 157 provincial hospitals and with blood 
obtained from almost 100% VNRBD practices. Overall, 2% of the adult eligible population donates blood. 
However, the challenge here again is with regards to remote provinces where they face great difficulties in 
ensuring adequate and timely blood supplies to the TDT patients. In the capital of Bangkok for example there 
is an excess (that may reach 40%) which is transported throughout the country to address the blood 
insufficiencies in the remote parts. Efforts are in progress for developing low-cost blood collection units and 
distribution centres in areas that are either lacking or are too far to be reached in a timely manner to address 
the needs of TDT patients and other transfusion-dependent diseases. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
105 
Lack of national registries, lack of reference/expert centres and updated epidemiological studies constitute 
common deficiencies and have not allowed the collection of reliable nationwide data on the quality and/or 
range of the services the transfusion and treating centres are providing to TD thalassaemia patients. 
Furthermore, despite reported existence of transfusion guidelines in most of the countries of the Region, the 
level of adherence to these is to-date unknown. 
Challenges are still faced by many patients in most countries either with regards to adequacy, timely, 
uninterrupted access to effective transfusion or with regards to the appropriateness for these patients of 
processed, stored blood/red cells (also expressed in the Global Survey the results of which were described 
earlier).  
VNRBD practices need to be significantly strengthened in many countries as well, as increasing the number of 
regular donors in almost all of them, acknowledging the huge contribution that such practices have to the 
safety of blood supplies.  
Strong national coordination of transfusion services needs to be established where it does not exist and 
needs to be strengthened where it does. Very importantly, blood transfusion services as well as all other 
medical/public health services need to be brought under truly patient centred universally covered healthcare 
systems to alleviate patients and families across the Region of having to identify family/friend donors and of 
the financial burden (small or large) that many of them face in accessing some treatment including transfusion-
related services. 
It is recognized that there are vast differences in geographic and population sizes, there is a heterogeneous 
distribution of patients across the Region and within countries, varying strengths and weaknesses in the 
medical and public health infrastructures, different risk levels for communicable diseases that countries still 
need to continue to address. Certainly, different strengths and weaknesses in economies exist across countries, 
a vast heterogeneity in blood donation and collection practices, in blood component separation and in 
processing and distribution, just to mention a few of the important elements needed to be addressed more 
effectively across this Region. It may thus be very challenging to establish uniform protocols for addressing the 
medical needs of these patients, including transfusion needs, across the Region. However, there is a need first 
to improve the basics, including the establishment of nationwide coordination of blood services with uniform 
standards and quality practices across all blood banks, public and private, equity in blood distribution and 
improvement of donor education (particularly with regards to regular donation) with main focus on VNRBD 
practices.  
In addition, the provision of all services including, BT therapy for TDT patients, should be made free of charge 
by law until universal coverage-based healthcare systems emerge in every country across the world. At the 
same time, however, the development of disease-specific prevention programmes is of paramount importance 
in ameliorating the public health burden, including blood transfusion, but also social and economic burden at 
the country level and by extension at the regional and international level.  
Upgrading existing and conducting new epidemiological work including micro mapping and developing 
disease-specific national registries, particularly in large countries will contribute significantly to the better, 
more targeted planning and promotion of appropriate disease specific policies including a more accurate 
assessment of the needs for blood.  
Considerably more data is needed to assess to any level the real status quo, including BT services for 
haemoglobin disorders in this Region, as is sadly the case with other Regions of the world as well. 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
106 
Western Pacific Region (WPR) 
This Region includes 28 countries (Australia, Brunei, Cambodia, China, Cook Islands, Fiji, Japan, Kiribati, Laos, 
Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mongolia, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, 
Philippines, Samoa, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Korea, Taiwan, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Vietnam) with 
a population of 1,889,901,000 people. 
19 National Thalassaemia Associations from 11 countries of the Region (Australia, Cambodia, China, Hong 
Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Vietnam) are members of TIF. 
Together with the Southeast Asia Region (SEAR), they represent the countries where more than 80% of patients 
with haemoglobin disorders - thalassaemia syndromes (α and β) and SCD (outside Africa), and combined forms 
of these - are born and live. This is the part of the world where >90% of α- and β-thalassaemia and HbE (and 
combined forms of these) exist with variable clinical severity and dependence on transfusion therapy. These 
forms were previously referred to as intermediate forms or thalassaemia intermedia with regard to their milder 
clinical outcome and in more recent years have been grouped under the designation of non-transfusion 
dependent thalassaemias (NTDT). Some of these, nevertheless, need occasional BT or may at some point 
convert to totally transfusion-dependent forms. 
 
The data in the tables below was taken from the “Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 2021” 
published by the World Health Organization: 
 
Table 28. Blood Centres & Data Coverage in WPR (2018) 
 
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Cambodia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Laos
18
0
18
18
0
18
Papua New Guinea
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Philippines
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Vietnam
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
China
452
0
452
452
0
452
Malaysia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Australia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Brunei
0
5
5
0
4
4
90
Singapore
1
0
1
1
0
1
/ : No response
Blank (in the last column) : 100%
Number of Blood Centres
Covered By The Report
Estimated
% of Blood 
Donations
BLOOD CENTRES & DATA COVERAGE (2018)
Country
Number of Blood Centres
In the Country
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
In conclusion, in this Region and despite the considerable efforts made by governments, healthcare 
professionals and patient organisations across the countries to address effectively the medical needs of 
patients with haemoglobin disorders, including BT therapy, in the last 2-3 decades there are still great and 
multiple challenges, some common to the countries across the Region and some specific to each country. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
107 
Table 29. Blood Donations in WPR (2018) 
 
 
Table 30. Laboratory Test Requirements for Screening Donated Blood for Transfusion-Transmissible Infection in 
WPR (2017/18) 
 
 
VNRD
VNRD from 1st
time donors
VNRD from
repeat donor
Family/replacement
donations
Paid
donations
Others
Total
% of
VNRD
% of family/ 
replacement
% of paid 
donations
Blood donations 
per 1,000
Cambodia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
3.5
Laos
45 982
19 242
17 471
2 998
0
49 070
93.70%
6.10%
0.00%
6.9
Papua New Guinea
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Philippines
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
8.2
Vietnam
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
10.8
China
13 661 423
…
…
39 196
0
13 700 619
99.70%
0.30%
0.00%
/
Malaysia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
22.6
Australia
690 759
690 759
100%
27.7
Brunei
15 537
2 825
9 864
0
0
15 537
100%
0%
0%
/
Singapore
115 826
24 349
91 477
0
0
0
115 826
100%
0%
0%
21.0
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
VNRD : Voluntary non-remunerated donations
Country
… : Not reported/not available
No. Whole Blood Donations Collected (excluding autologous donations)
BLOOD DONATIONS (2018)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
Ab
Others
Smear
microscopy
Ag
Others
Ab
Others
Cambodia
Laos
Papua New Guinea
Philippines*
Y
Vietnam*
S
China
S
Malaysia
S
Australia*
S
Y
Brunei
Singapore
S
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
S : Required for selected donations
Blank : Not required/not applicable
Y : Required for all donations
LABORATORY TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR SCREENING DONATED
BLOOD FOR TRANSFUSION-TRANSMISSIBLE INFECTIONS  (2017/18)
Country
Chagas disease
Malaria
HTLV-1/2
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
108 
Table 31. Number & Proportion of Donations Tested Positive/Reactive for TTI Markers IN WPR (2018) 
 
 
Table 32. Clinical Use of Blood & Blood Components in WPR (2018) 
 
 
Positive/reactive, no.
No. donations tested
%*
Cambodia
/
/
/
Laos
129
49 070
0.26
Papua New Guinea
/
/
/
Philippines
/
/
/
Vietnam
/
/
/
China
…
…
…
Malaysia
/
/
/
Australia
7
1 329 849
<0.001
Brunei
7
15 988
0.04
Singapore
6
124 229
0.004
/ : No response
* Proportion, expressed as positive/reactive per 100 donations tested
… : Not reported/not available
HIV 1+2
NUMBER & PROPORTION OF DONATIONS TESTED 
POSITIVE/REACTIVE FOR TTI MARKERS (2018)
Country
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
Whole blood
Red cells
Whole blood
derived platelets
Apheresis
platelets
Fresh frozen 
plasma
Plasma
Cryo-precipitate
Cambodia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Laos
57
17 731
31 522
751
0
2 174
0
559
Units issued
Papua New Guinea
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Philippines
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Vietnam
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
China
…
41 745
22 607 300
523 970
1 778 523
…
…
…
Units issued
Malaysia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Australia
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Brunei
4
0
15 995
2 080
563
2 555
0
86
Units transfused
Singapore
21
0
111 070
58 240
9 614
23 908
42
18 986
Units transfused
/ : No response
Blank : Not required/not applicable
… : Not reported/not available
Country
No. Hospitals
Performing
Blood Tranfusion
No. Units of Blood Components Issued/Transfused
(excluding autologous blood units)
CLINICAL USE OF BLOOD & BLOOD COMPONENTS (2018)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
109 
Table 33. Policy, Governance, Quality Assurance and Monitoring in WPR (2017/18) 
 
 
Below, three countries with significant disease prevalence are briefly described with regards to their BT 
services. 
CHINA (upper-middle-income country) has a population of 1,439,323,776 people (18.47% of the global 
population). It is officially divided into 23 provinces, 5 autonomous regions, 4 direct-controlled municipalities 
(Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai and Chongqing), and the special administrative regions (SAR) of Hong Kong and 
Macau. 
All southern provinces of China have a high prevalence of haemoglobin disorders, both α- and β-thalassaemia, 
being located in one of the regions of the world with the highest α-thalassaemia carrier rates. Despite the great 
improvements made through the years in establishing prevention programmes that have been shown to be 
quite effective in some of these Provinces, the management of patients remains to-date a huge challenge and 
an immense unmet need. Carrier rates for β-thalassaemia vary from 1.1% in Guizhou to 6.78% in Guangxi, and 
for α-thalassaemia from 5% in Hong Kong SAR to 14.95% in Guangxi and 12.96% in Guangdong and Haiwan. 
Despite the Blood Donation Law that came into effect in 1998, the huge progress achieved in the increase of 
blood supplies and in the implementation of safety policies (including NAT on all donations), patients report 
many challenges with regards to the receipt of timely, uninterrupted and adequate BT therapy and this is 
indeed a major concern. This is despite the promotion of a more coordinated and consolidated infrastructure 
of BT services in current years. Three important challenges remain: (i) sustainability of VNRBD; (ii) blood service 
cost assessment; and (iii) recovery, systematic and objective evaluation of blood service safety. There is no data 
to-date to confirm the achievement of a goal that had been set to reach 1.5% of donors/population rate by 2020, 
which would have been translated as a 50% increase over 5 years (2016–2020). The amount of blood donated 
annually, unfortunately, does not keep up with the increased demand. This is partially in consequence to the 
government launching 2,000 national health insurance reforms that seek to provide health insurance coverage 
to all citizens. 
The WHO recommends a minimum of 20–25 donors per 1,000 population. However, with 11.2 million donors 
and a population of 1.33 billion, China has a rate of only 8.4 donors per 1,000 population, with over 60% of 
donors being first time donors [10,11]. Statistics from 2015 revealed that approximately 22 million whole blood 
donations with VNRBD were collected, reaching 99%. The unmet need for blood is severe not only in the remote 
rural areas, which is expected to some extent in very large countries with huge populations, but also in the more 
economically developed large cities, where the number of patients is increasing (either due to patient relocating 
residence or patient travel to receive advanced treatment), while at the same time blood collection and thus 
blood supplies are not proportionally increased. In Beijing, for example, transfusion needs increased from 53.6 
million units in 1998 to 140 million units in 2008, a transfusion rate of 57 units per 1,000 population; higher than 
Cambodia*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Laos
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Papua New Guinea
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Philippines*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vietnam*
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
China
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Malaysia*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Australia*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Brunei
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Singapore
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
Blank : Not required/not applicable
National standards for the 
collection, testing processing, 
storage & distributuion of blood 
and blood components
National Guidelines On 
The Appropriate 
Clinical Use Of Blood
Unit within MoH with 
responsibility for governing 
blood provision & transfusion 
activities
National 
Blood 
Policy
Multiyear national 
strategic plan for 
blood safety or 
equivalent
Specific Legislation Covering 
the Safety & Quality Of Blood 
And Blood Products for 
Transfusion
National Blood 
Committee
(or equivalent)
Specific Government 
Budgetary Line Item 
For The NBTS/BTS
System of Cost 
Recovery for 
NBTS/BTS
Country
POLICY, GOVERNANCE, QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING (2017/18)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
Lower-Middle Income (LMC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
110 
that of Canada (32/1,000), the EU (40/1,000) and the USA (49/1,000). In Nanjing, where the prevalence of TDT 
is known to be very high, the transfusion collection was 20 million units in 2011, accounting for only 75% of its 
clinical demand for blood, and in a 2014 published study, family replacement donation represented 6.6% of all 
blood collected and as high as 9.9% during seasonal shortage. 
Considerable work needs to be done in donor recruitment, management and retention and on revisiting 
transfusion costs, defining VNRBD and implementing a universal programme of haemovigilance. Taiwan 
(China) and Hong Kong SAR have demonstrated high quality work in the transfusion and other medical 
treatment of patients with TDT and have acquired for decades now excellent levels of disease-specific 
knowledge and expertise. Establishment of an effective well-structured networking system with the Southern 
Provinces, some of which also have great medical expertise, will be extremely valuable. This will allow sharing 
of best practices and allow the central and provincial governments to recognise the cost effectiveness of 
providing optimal nationally coordinated BT and other medical care to TDT patients. 
 
CAMBODIA (lower-middle-income country) [12,13] has a population of 16,718,965 people (0.21% of the global 
population). It has an annual whole blood collection of 76,511, most of which (79%) is separated into 
components; only 26.5% of the blood supplies, however, come from VNRBD practices. An infectious disease 
rate of 5.9% has been reported amongst blood donors. Cambodia established its first blood policy in 2003 and 
its first National Strategic Plan for Blood in 2008, while in 2013 it developed its Blood Reference Centres. It has 
21 provincial Blood Transfusion Centres across the country and four of these are Key Regional Centres. In terms 
of blood service delivery, the blood supply to rural areas is often very challenging due to geographical isolation 
and, as a result of seasonal flooding, which in addition brings outbreaks of malaria and dengue fever. Moreover, 
20% of government spending occurs at the provincial and local levels and this is consistently delayed and often 
differs from initial budget amounts, imposing a heavy burden on individuals to finance their own healthcare. 
TIF supported healthcare professionals in Cambodia in 2006 to develop National Guidelines for the 
Management of Thalassaemia, but the level of adherence to them is largely questionable. This is because 
thalassaemia has not been included as a priority disease on the national health agenda and no disease-specific 
policy has been developed since then. TIF’s information indicates that many challenges are faced by patients, 
particularly outside the capital and morbidity and mortality rates of TDT patients are anticipated to be high. 
 
VIET NAM [14] (lower middle-income country) has a population of 97,338,579 people (1.25% of the global 
population). Thalassaemia is common in this country with carrier rates of α-thalassaemia, β-thalassaemia and 
HbE, and combined forms of these, varying amongst the different ethnic groups. For more information see 
Chapter on Epidemiology.  
The number of patients, in the absence of a national registry, is largely unknown and it is reported that the 
largest treating centres are: (i) at the National Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion; and (ii) several 
outpatient clinics at the National Hospital of Paediatrics, Children No. 1 Hospital and Blood Transfusion and 
Haematology Hospital Ho Chi Minh City, of Central Hue Hospital. Provincial hospitals provide BT therapy for 
patients, but with widely variable quality. 
Viet Nam has an annual quantity of blood/million of 0.45 and blood units/100 people of 0.55, one of the lowest 
globally. Thus, given the range of clinical severity of patients, BT therapy for TDT patients is anticipated to be 
largely suboptimal, in terms of both availability and quality, reflected by the very young population of patients 
throughout the country, as reported to TIF in a 2015 survey (>70% of known patients registered in the big 
hospitals are <15 years of age). 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
111 
Region on the Americas (PAHO) 
The Region of the Americas includes 42 countries with a population of 992,155,000 people.  
National Thalassaemia Associations from four countries of the region are members of TIF. 
Since 1999 several resolutions on blood safety have been adopted by the Region of the Americas (PAH): 
CD41.R15(1999), CD46 R5(2005), CE 142.R5(2008), CD48.R7(2008). 
In 2014, the countries of the Pan American Region approved a Plan of Action for Universal Access to Safe Blood 
for 2014–2019 (Document CD5316) together with an associated Resolution CD53R6.  
Latin America and Caribbean countries, as assessed in 2017, are in need of 10 million units, per year, the blood 
donor rate stands at 17.7 units/1,000 population and only 46% of their collected blood comes from VNRBD 
practices [15]. Four out of 42 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean collect 75% of all blood units 
reported in PAH in 2011, namely Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Columbia. Only 10 out of the 42 countries have 
achieved 100% VNRBD; two of these in Latin America and eight in the Caribbean.  
In the analysis below, focus will be given only to Brazil, Argentina and Trinidad & Tobago where most of the 
patients with haemoglobin disorders in the South of the Americas Region are found, while the USA and Canada 
will be addressed separately. 
The data in the tables below was taken from WHO’s Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 2021. 
Table 34. Blood Donations in PAHO 
 
 
Table 35. Blood Centres & Data Coverage in PAHO 
 
VNRD
VNRD from 1st
time donors
VNRD from
repeat donor
Family/replacement
donations
Paid
donations
Others
Total
% of
VNRD
% of family/ 
replacement
% of paid 
donations
Blood donations 
per 1,000
Argentina
2017
495 000
297 000
198 000
609 532
0
1 104 532
44.80%
55.20%
0.00%
24.9
Brazil
2017
2 395 417
1 447 387
948 030
1 465 433
0
3 860 850
62%
38%
0%
18.9
Canada
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
0
21.7
Trinidad & Tobago
2017
4 737
1 180
3 557
16 746
0
21 483
22.10%
77.90%
0.00%
15.8
USA
2018
5 934 137
1 235 853
4 468 618
1 113
0
0
5 935 250
99.90%
0.10%
0.00%
18.2
VNRD : Voluntary non-remunerated donations
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
No. Whole Blood Donations Collected (excluding autologous donations)
BLOOD DONATIONS
Country
Date Year
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Argentina
2017
38
149
187
34
129
163
95
Brazil
2017
…
…
3 071
…
…
…
Canada
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Trinidad & Tobago
2017
0
7
7
0
7
7
USA
2018
65
0
65
5
0
5
62
Blank (in the last column) : 100%
/ : No response
Country
… : Not reported/not available
BLOOD CENTRES & DATA COVERAGE
Number of Blood Centres
In the Country
Number of Blood Centres
Covered By The Report
Estimated
% of Blood 
Donations
Date Year
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
112 
Table 36. Laboratory Test Requirements for Screening Donated Blood for Transfusion-Transmissible Infections in 
PAHO (2017/18) 
 
Table 37. Number & Proportion of0 Donations Tested Positive/Reactive for TTI Markers in PAHO 
 
 
 
Ab
Others
Smear
microscopy
Ag
Others
Ab
Others
Argentina
Y
Y
Brazil
Y
Y
Y
Canada
S
Y
Trinidad & Tobago
Y
Y
USA
S
Y
Blank : Not required/not applicable
Country
Chagas disease
Malaria
HTLV-1/2
S : Required for selected donations
Y : Required for all donations
LABORATORY TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR SCREENING DONATED
BLOOD FOR TRANSFUSION-TRANSMISSIBLE INFECTIONS  (2017/18)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
Positive/reactive, no.
No. donations tested
%*
Argentina
2017
1 654
1 102 875
0.15
Brazil
2017
8 636
3 143 417
0.28
Canada
2018
/
/
/
Trinidad & Tobago
2017
49
21 645
0.23
USA
2018
855
6 951 668
0.01
Country
HIV 1+2
Date Year
* Proportion, expressed as positive/reactive per 100 donations tested
/ : No response
NUMBER & PROPORTION OF DONATIONS
TESTED POSITIVE/REACTIVE FOR TTI MARKERS
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
113 
Table 38. Clinical Use of Blood & Blood Components in PAHO 
 
 
Table 39. Policy, Governance, Quality Assurance and Monitoring in PAHO (2017/18) 
 
 
ARGENTINA (upper-middle-income country) has a specific law, specific budget and national policy, but no 
national transfusion committee. Argentina collected 1,026,846 units of blood (2015) with a blood donation 
rate/1,000 people of 20.55 with only 45.66% from VNRBD practices, 54.34% from replacement and with 85% of 
its units separated into packed RBCs. TIF’s archives record around 350 patients with TDT in this country. Treating 
physicians reported (in 2015) that the major challenge was, and still is, the empowerment of society to donate 
blood voluntarily and regularly, since patients and families are still struggling to identify family members and 
friends as donors to achieve adequate blood supplies for their needs.  
Screening is very well established in 100% of its collected blood for HIV 1+2, HbsAg, HCV and syphilis. In 
addition, T. cruzi, HTLV.1 +3 and anti-HBC are routinely screened for. Medical expertise for addressing 
haemoglobin disorders is available in the country and although no published national data is available on 
survival and/or age distribution, it is likely that appropriate quality of care is provided. However specific data, 
such as survival rates and age distribution of the patients, are needed to allow a better understanding of the 
effectiveness of the transfusion therapy and other care provided to patients with TDT. 
 
BRAZIL (upper middle-income country) also has a specific law, specific budget and a national policy. Brazil, with 
3 million (3,335,035) units of blood collected in 2015 (blood donation rate per 1,000 people of 16.51), reported 
that 61.25% of its blood supply is derived from VNRBD practices while a similar percentage as that of Argentina 
Whole blood
Red cells
Whole blood
derived platelets
Apheresis
platelets
Fresh frozen 
plasma
Plasma
Cryo-precipitate
Argentina
2017
1 135
7 335
1 016 808
491 700
59 197
291 240
12 281
23 000
Brazil
2017
…
937
1 329 853
491 640
291 710
9 899
63 391
Canada
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Trinidad & Tobago
2017
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
USA
2018
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
* 1 unit of blood component is defined as the preparation from whole blood donations of 450 ml
** 1 unit of apheresis platelets usually contains 200 - 450 x 10 000 000 000 platelets 
/ : No response
No. Hospitals
Performing
Blood Tranfusion
No. Units of Blood Components Issued/Transfused
(excluding autologous blood units)
Country
Date Year
Blank : Not required/not applicable
… : Not reported/not available
CLINICAL USE OF BLOOD & BLOOD COMPONENTS
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
Argentina
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Brazil
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Canada
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Trinidad & Tobago
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
USA
Yes
…
…
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Yes
System of 
Cost Recovery 
for NBTS/BTS
Country
National 
Blood 
Policy
Multiyear national 
strategic plan for 
blood safety or 
equivalent
Specific Legislation Covering 
the Safety & Quality Of 
Blood And Blood Products 
for Transfusion
National Blood 
Committee
(or equivalent)
Specific Government 
Budgetary Line Item 
For The NBTS/BTS
… : Not reported/not available
POLICY, GOVERNANCE, QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING (2017/18)
National standards for the 
collection, testing processing, 
storage & distributuion of blood 
and blood components
National Guidelines On 
The Appropriate 
Clinical Use Of Blood
Unit within MoH with 
responsibility for governing 
blood provision & 
transfusion activities
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High-Income (HIC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
114 
(i.e., 86.33% of its supply) is separated in blood components. Screening is performed on 100% of its collected 
blood for HIV, HbsAg, HCV, and syphilis, as well as for T. cruzi, HTLV 1 and 3, and anti-HBC.  
With 662 TDT patients recorded in TIF’s archives and an estimated 30,000–50,000 SCD patients, safety and 
adequacy of blood for their transfusion needs are of utmost importance. There is sufficient medical expertise in 
this country, which indicates that, together with the above information and the complementary information 
from TIF’s National Thalassaemia Association members, it is likely that the majority of patients across this 
country are obtaining adequate medical care, albeit with limited published data on national survival and age 
distribution. 
TRINIDAD & TOBAGO (high income country) has a population of 1.3 million people. The blood units collected 
annually total 21,121, with only 18.41% from VNRBD practices. There are close to 100 TDT patients, with a larger 
number of SCD patients, since the sickle cell trait is prevalent in approximately 1 in 10 persons in this country. 
Based on TIF’s data, appropriate clinical practices and sufficient medical expertise are available. It is thus 
expected that further to the heavy burden of identifying donors, the survival and quality of life of patients will 
be at satisfactory levels, albeit once again more specific data is needed to confirm and/or identity gaps and 
weaknesses. 
For North America, CANADA AND USA (both high income countries), with a total population of 37.59 million 
and 328.2 million people respectively, also have blood shortages. Both countries have very robust public health 
infrastructure, including nationally coordinated and high-quality standards of transfusion services with nearly 
100% of the collected blood based on VNRBD practices. In addition, there is considerable knowledge and 
expertise on the part of the medical community on the management of haemoglobin disorders as well as 
considerable research activity by scientists on these disorders for many decades now. 
In particular, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the USA contribute through many 
different research projects to significant improvements in BT therapy for these disorders. Patients with TDT 
and other haemoglobin disorders are anticipated to receive adequate, safe and appropriately processed/stored 
blood as recommended in international guidelines. Updated published information on survival rates, age 
distribution and morbidity/mortality rates of each state and nationwide is not available or is only partially 
available. 
However, an important difference between Canada and the USA concerns the principle of universal healthcare 
coverage, with Canada enjoying universal health coverage contrary to USA where the healthcare system is 
based on private insurance and one’s income. Strong efforts are exerted by the central government, patient-
oriented NGOs and the community of healthcare professionals in the USA to identify solutions and measures 
to cover the cost of every aspect of care and monitoring of every patient in any of the states, including BT 
therapy. However, it is inevitable that some patients face challenges in accessing timely appropriate care, 
including transfusion therapy. Patient organisations, such as the Cooley's Anemia Foundation (CAF) in the USA, 
are making every effort to contribute to filling in gaps and inequities and strengthening research. 
Moreover, blood transfusion therapy and identifying appropriate donors proves to be a challenge, because of 
multiethnic populations in the USA who come from many parts of the world where NTDT syndromes and SCD 
are more prevalent, and patients may initiate BT at a later point in their lives.  
Despite the known high standards of BT services in these two countries, published national data on survival and 
age distribution are largely missing, mainly as a result of the absence of nationally coordinated disease-specific 
health registries. Some data are available through the excellent work of patient organisations including the 
Cooley's Anemia Foundation albeit more nationwide information is needed. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
115 
European Region (EURO) 
 
The European Region includes 53 countries with a population of 916,315,000 people. 
TIF members in the region include 39 National Thalassaemia Associations from 20 countries.  
EUR is a region where only about 8% of the global patient community with haemoglobin disorders live. Most 
of the countries, at least within the European Union and the United Kingdom, have robust medical, public 
health and social care infrastructures, including nationally coordinated BT services and some of them have 
established strong haemovigilance programmes. Haemoglobin disorders, consequent to migration through the 
decades, have been introduced into the populations of many countries in EUR and are to-date included in the 
wider family of Rare Diseases. Some of these countries, mainly the United Kingdom and France, have 
developed national disease-specific programmes (including BT ones) to address the needs of these patients. In 
most other EU countries, whether in the indigenous population (e.g., Spain, Bulgaria, Romania) or in the 
migrant groups (e.g., Germany, Netherlands and more recently Central and Northern European countries), 
patients’ needs are addressed in the context of the paediatric or haematology services of their healthcare 
systems; but in all of them disease-specific programmes and services for transfusion therapy have been 
amongst their public health concerns and priorities. In Southern Europe (mainly Italy, Greece and Cyprus), these 
disorders are of high prevalence in the indigenous populations, and numerous national disease-specific policies 
and programmes have been developed since the 1960s to address the care and management of those patients. 
BT services have been a key focus of these policies, and blood donor campaigns and advocacy for blood quality 
and safety have been impressively strong for decades now in these countries. Nevertheless, challenges still exist 
particularly in blood adequacy and to a certain extent in securing 100% VNRBD practices. Greece, for example, 
still reports importing blood and having about 30% of its blood supplies deriving from family donations. Patients 
in some other countries of the EU and extended Europe, including Bulgaria, Romania, Albania and Turkey, face 
similar challenges and perhaps to a bigger extent based on patients’ reports. Blood adequacy and safety remain 
a key focus of the work of all countries in effectively addressing haemoglobin disorders, and, in this context, 
blood shortages and donor recruitment and retention are still key challenges. 
The data in the tables below was taken from the WHO’s Global Status Report on Blood Safety and Availability 
2021. 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
116 
Table 40. Blood Centres & Data Coverage in EURO (2018) 
 
 
Table 41. Blood Donations in EURO (2018) 
 
 
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Stand-alone
Hospital-based
Total
Albania
1
31
32
1
31
32
Azerbaijan
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Bulgaria
6
23
29
6
23
29
North Macedonia
21
21
Turkey
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Cyprus
4
0
4
4
0
4
Denmark
0
5
5
0
5
5
France
18
0
18
18
0
18
Germany
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Greece
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Italy
0
278
278
0
278
278
Malta
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Netherlands
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Sweden
0
26
26
0
26
26
United Kingdom
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/ : No response
Blank (in the last column) : 100%
BLOOD CENTRES & DATA COVERAGE (2018)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
Country
Number of Blood Centres
In the Country
Number of Blood Centres
Covered By The Report
Estimated
% of Blood 
Donations
High Income (HIC)
VNRD
VNRD from 1st
time donors
VNRD from
repeat donor
Family/replacement
donations
Paid
donations
Others
Total
% of
VNRD
% of family/ 
replacement
% of paid 
donations
Blood donations 
per 1,000
Albania
9 282
…
…
23 144
650
11
33 087
28.00%
70.00%
2.00%
11.5
Azerbaijan
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Bulgaria
167 424
36 115
45 332
130 551
2 209
300 184
55.80%
43.50%
0.70%
42.7
North Macedonia
53 915
5 451
48 465
271
0
0
54 186
99.50%
0.50%
0.00%
28.7
Turkey
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
29.4
Cyprus
63 008
0
63 008
0
0
63 008
100%
0%
0%
49.6
Denmark
206 990
16 773
190 217
0
0
0
206 990
100%
0%
0%
35.7
France
2 512 870
387 109
2 125 761
0
0
2 512 870
100%
0%
0%
37.4
Germany
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
51.1
Greece
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
46.6
Italy
2 569 275
371 093
2 198 182
0
0
0
2 569 275
100%
0%
0%
42.5
Malta
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
34.0
Netherlands
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
25.5
Sweden
409 187
29 146
409 187
0
0
409 187
100%
0%
0%
40.2
United Kingdom
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
3.8
… : Not reported/not available
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
VNRD : Voluntary non-remunerated donations
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
No. Whole Blood Donations Collected (excluding autologous donations)
BLOOD DONATIONS (2018)
Country
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
117 
Table 42. Laboratory Test Requirements for Screening Donated Blood for Transfusion-Transmissible Infections in 
EURO (2017/18) 
 
 
Table 43. Policy, Governance, Quality Assurance and Monitoring in EURO (2017/18) 
 
Ab
Others
Smear
microscopy
Ag
Others
Ab
Others
Albania
Azerbaijan
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Bulgaria
North Macedonia
Turkey
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Cyprus
Denmark
S
France
S
S
Germany*
Greece
S
Y
Italy
S
Malta
Netherlands*
S
S
Sweden
S
S
S
United Kingdom*
S
S
/ : No response
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
S : Required for selected donations
Blank : Not required/not applicable
Y : Required for all donations
Malaria
HTLV-1/2
LABORATORY TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR SCREENING DONATED
BLOOD FOR TRANSFUSION-TRANSMISSIBLE INFECTIONS  (2017/18)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
Country
Chagas disease
High Income (HIC)
Albania
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Azerbaijan
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Bulgaria
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
North Macedonia
…
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Turkey
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cyprus
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Denmark
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
France
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Germany*
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Greece*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Italy
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
…
Yes
Yes
Malta
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
…
Netherlands*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sweden
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
United Kingdom*
…
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
…
No
Yes
Yes
* Data of 2017/2018 was not available, therefore data of earlier years were listed in the table
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
National standards for the 
collection, testing processing, 
storage & distributuion of blood 
and blood components
National Guidelines On 
The Appropriate Clinical 
Use Of Blood
… : Not reported/not available
Unit within MoH with 
responsibility for governing 
blood provision & 
transfusion activities
National 
Blood 
Policy
Multiyear national 
strategic plan for 
blood safety or 
equivalent
Specific Legislation Covering 
the Safety & Quality Of Blood 
And Blood Products for 
Transfusion
National Blood 
Committee
(or equivalent)
Specific Government 
Budgetary Line Item 
For The NBTS/BTS
System of Cost 
Recovery for 
NBTS/BTS
POLICY, GOVERNANCE, QUALITY ASSURANCE AND MONITORING (2017/18)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
Country
High Income (HIC)
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
118 
Table 44. Number & Proportion of Donations Tested Positive/Reactive for TTI Markers in EURO (2018) 
 
 
Table 45. Clinical Use of Blood & Blood Components in EURO 
 
In the EU (including the United Kingdom until the end of 2019), as shown in Figure 23, from 15 million donors, 
20 million units of blood are collected, all of which undergo component separation in 1,400 blood 
establishments. 
Positive/reactive, no.
No. donations tested
%*
Albania
5
23 312
0.02
Azerbaijan
/
/
/
Bulgaria
143
169 633
0.08
North Macedonia
0
20 771
0
Turkey
/
/
/
Cyprus
2
63 008
0.003
Denmark
0
278 975
0
France
25
2 926 942
<0.001
Germany
/
/
/
Greece
/
/
/
Italy
83
2 991 082
0.003
Malta
/
/
/
Netherlands
/
/
/
Sweden
0
491 036
0
United Kingdom
/
/
/
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
* Proportion, expressed as positive/reactive per 100 donations tested
Country
NUMBER & PROPORTION OF DONATIONS TESTED 
POSITIVE/REACTIVE FOR TTI MARKERS (2018)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
HIV 1+2
High Income (HIC)
Whole blood
Red cells
Whole blood
derived platelets
Apheresis
platelets
Fresh frozen 
plasma
Plasma
Cryo-precipitate
Albania
2018
32
391
22 452
4 217
…
14 508
7 643
466
Units issued
Azerbaijan
2017
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Bulgaria
2018
172
92
155 525
26 712
2 145
100 310
100
Units issued
North Macedonia
2018
55
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Turkey
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Cyprus
2018
65
0
61 574
5 208^
335
12 004
113
Units transfused
Denmark
2018
…
0
195 049
36 128^
1 948
20 438
1 441
956
Units transfused
France
2018
…
0
2 295 441
208 585^
118 859
287 922
0
0
Units transfused
Germany
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Greece
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Italy
2018
1 544
18
2 443 359
170 867^
55 596
140 395
0
1 786
Units transfused
Malta
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Netherlands
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
Sweden
2018
…
0
390 404
47 608^
16 128
41 569
0
0
Units transfused
United Kingdom
2018
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
** 1 unit of apheresis platelets usually contains 200 - 450 x 10 000 000 000 platelets 
^ : In adult therapeutic doses
* 1 unit of blood component is defined as the preparation from whole blood donations of 450 ml
Blank : Not required/not applicable
/ : No response
… : Not reported/not available
Country
Date Year
No. Hospitals
Performing
Blood Tranfusion
No. Units of Blood Components Issued/Transfused (excluding autologous blood units)
CLINICAL USE OF BLOOD & BLOOD COMPONENTS (2018)
Upper-Middle Income (UMC)
High Income (HIC)
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
119 
 
Figure 
23. 
Blood 
donations 
and 
transfusions 
in 
the 
EU. 
Source: 
https://ec.europa.eu/health/blood_tissues_organs/blood_en 
 
Figure 24 identifies the periodic variation in blood donor demographics in Europe where it is demonstrated that 
the percentage of blood donors (those who have ever given blood) although steadily increasing between 1994 
and 2009 showed a decrease in 2014 in almost all countries (except France, the United Kingdom and Cyprus). 
Although a decrease was not reported for Portugal, its general performance over the years with regard to the 
percentage of those who have ever given blood is rather weak. Countries with a focus on haemoglobin 
disorders, e.g. France, Greece and Cyprus, have demonstrated numbers above the EU average, while Germany 
and the United Kingdom have kept their percentage just about the level of the EU average. Italy, however, with 
a very high prevalence of TD haemoglobin disorders, has shown significantly lower rates than the EU average, 
while Austria, with a much lower prevalence of TD haemoglobin disorders (which have been more recently 
introduced), exhibits the highest performance as reflected by the high percentage of people who have ever 
given blood. Certainly, increases in the numbers of blood donors does not necessarily contribute to effectively 
addressing BT therapy of patients with haemoglobin disorders. The absence or suboptimal functioning of 
patient management/clinical use of blood programmes and the exponentially increasing needs for blood 
transfusion in addressing other medical conditions pose significant challenges in blood supplies to meet 
national needs including those required for lifelong TDT patients. 
Moreover, another study [7], as shown in the maps below (Figure 24), showed that perceived blood transfusion 
safety and personal motivation amongst EU citizens may be stronger determinants of willingness to donate 
than just receiving certain incentives. EU-–wide strategies for donor recruitment and retention should thus take 
both overall and country-specific patterns into account, including for example, education on the importance of 
donation. 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
120 
 
Figure 24. Periodic variation in blood donor demographics. Source: Wittock N, Hustinx L, Bracke P, Buffel V. Who 
donates? Cross-country and periodical variation in blood donor demographics in Europe between 1994 and 2014. 
Transfusion. 2017 Nov;57(11):2619-2628. doi: 10.1111/trf.14272. Epub 2017 Aug 25. PMID: 28840944. 
 
 
Figure 25. Figure 29. Blood donor motivation perceptions in the EU. Source: Huis In 't Veld EMJ, de Kort WLAM, Merz 
EM. Determinants of blood donation willingness in the European Union: a cross-country perspective on perceived 
transfusion safety, concerns, and incentives. Transfusion. 2019;59(4):1273-1282. doi:10.1111/trf.15209 
Overall, from this same study 37.9% (n=8,471) of all 6,434 respondents included participants across EU Member 
States who had ever donated blood (Map 1), 76% would be willing to do so again. However, only 56.3% of those 
with no previous history of blood donations would be willing to donate in the future (Map 2). In Greece, for 
example, a representative of the Panhellenic Association of Patients NGO reported in the context of a 
conference in January 2020 that 90% of the individuals who meet the criteria for blood donation do not donate. 
In conclusion, and although the level of blood donation across the EU is amongst the highest globally as seen 
in Figure 30 below, relating GDP/person to whole blood donation per 1,000 population, blood shortages still 
constitute the major concerns amongst both patients with TD haemoglobin disorders, their treating physicians 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
121 
and BT services across the EU and beyond. Such concerns were very much demonstrated particularly during 
the Covid-19 pandemic. Indeed, the pandemic, underscored the challenge and the need for every country in 
every region of the world to strengthen public health services in the context of centrally and quality coordinated 
BT services. Even in the EU, where at least blood safety has truly reached very satisfactory levels, blood 
shortages were indeed reported by all patients even if that occurred only temporarily and is a major concern. 
 
 
Figure 26. Blood donations and GDP per person (2013) 
 
Overall, in the EU, published evidence on the survival, quality of life and age distribution of patients with TD 
haemoglobin disorders indicates that the majority of TD patients are receiving optimal or nearly optimal 
medical care, including blood transfusion therapy. However, policymakers need to seriously consider the heavy 
migration influxes in recent years from countries mainly of the Middle East and other parts of the world where 
the prevalence of haemoglobin disorders is medium to high. Disease-specific policies and programmes need to 
be developed and/or existing ones need to be improved to address the emerging needs of these populations 
and allow public health systems to make the necessary adjustments in order to meet the needs of TDT patients 
in a timely and adequate fashion. Nonetheless, at the same time the quality and safety of the national 
transfusion services as a whole must not be jeopardised. 
 
Regional Policy Landscape 
It is noteworthy to mention that in the European Region, the tools that EU has promoted for its people with 
regards to blood, cell and tissue safety mainly concerns the proposed regulation on substances of human origin 
that combines the following past directives: 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
122 
 
The legal framework defining the quality and safety standards for blood and its components is very strong in 
the EU and is set out in Directive 2002/98/EC, also referred to as the European Blood Directive. It covers all steps 
in the transfusion process, including donation, collection, testing, processing, storage, and distribution.  
To help implement this main act, the European Commission and the Council of Europe (CoE) have proposed 
and adopted, in close collaboration with EU national authorities, other additional acts. It is important to note 
that EU Member States can always choose to apply more stringent rules to the quality and safety of blood and 
blood products than those outlined above. 
In 2020, the European Commission carried out the first formal evaluation of the EU blood and tissues and cells 
legislation that showcased the need to replace the existing Directives with a Regulation on the centralised 
monitoring and coordination of blood establishments and the harmonisation across Member States, facilitating 
cross-border exchange of SoHO and improving patient access to the therapies they need. In July 2022, the 
European Commission adopted the proposal for a Regulation on standards of quality and safety for substances 
of human origin intended for human application (‘SoHO Regulation’). As of December 2022, the proposed 
Regulation is under consultation and discussion in the European Parliament and Council. 
It is noteworthy also that some EU Member States with high disease prevalence, such as Cyprus, use more than 
30% of their blood supplies annually on addressing transfusion needs of patients with TD haemoglobin 
disorders. Similarly, in Greece 20%–25% of the 580,000–600,000 units used annually in the hospitals (i.e., 
120,000–130,000) are for TDT patients. Apparently, this is not sufficient for their needs; thus, family 
replacement practices are still in place for more than 30% of the collected blood, and Greece has imported blood 
for years to meet the needs of BT therapy. A similar percentage between 18%–30% are noted in Italy, with the 
majority being around 16%–18%. It is evident that regular VNRBD practices and safeguarding blood supply 
levels through specific policies and programmes at national and European levels are of utmost importance for 
patients with TDT. This is particularly important as these patients are ageing due to the quality of care. The 
burden of identifying donors for family replacement practices and/or importing blood are practices that 
transfusion services, healthcare professionals and patients aim to abolish. 
The CoE regularly reviews and updates technical requirements in its Guide to the Preparation, Use and Quality 
Assurance of Blood Components and Good Practice Guidelines for Blood Establishments. In addition, it 
prepares ad-hoc guidelines on different topics, in regard to the safety and quality of substances of human origin 
(SoHO). 
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) prepares risk assessments and preparedness 
plans whenever epidemiological outbreaks are of relevance for blood, tissues, cells and organs. In addition, the 
European Commission provides funding for actions in the area of SoHO through the EU Health Programme, 
mainly in the form of projects or joint actions with national authorities. 
 
• 
Commission Directive 2004/33/EC on the technical requirements for blood and blood donation 
 
• 
Commission Directive 2005/61/EC on the traceability requirements and notification 
responsibilities in case of serious adverse reactions and events 
 
• 
Commission Directive 2005/62/EC that sets out Community standards and specifications relating 
to the quality system for a blood bank 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
123 
 
 
A number of actions aim to support the EU mandate on safety and quality and can also serve to promote other 
policy priorities such as improving the availability of SoHO or the efficiency of the health systems that support 
donation and supply. Nonetheless, despite all the progress in safety regulation and practices in Europe the 
danger to multi-transfused patients is ever present. A recent report from Italy describes an HCV outbreak in a 
group of transfused thalassaemia major outpatients, which started in May 2016 and ended in July 2017. This 
outbreak investigation identified seven new HCV infections and four HCV reinfections amongst 128 patients. 
The investigation concluded that transmission from hospital personnel or patient-to-patient transmission may 
have occurred, using genome sequencing to support epidemiological data. [Mazzucco W, Chiara di Maio V, 
Bronte F, Fabeni L, Pipitone RM, Grimaudo S, Ferraro D, Marotta C, Aragri M, Macaluso M, Vitale F, Di Raimondo 
F, Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Di Marco V. Phylogenetic analysis in the clinical risk management of an outbreak of 
hepatitis C virus infection among transfused thalassaemia patients in Italy. J Hosp Infect. 2021 Sep;115:51-58. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2021.06.007. PMID: 34171407.] 
In the 2017, 2018 and 2019 report of the European Committee (Partial Agreement) on Blood Transfusion CD-P-
TS, titled The Collection, Testing and Use of Blood and Blood Components in Europe, the following observations 
were made: 
 
 
1. 
``Two guides on Patient Blood Management (PBM). One targeted for health authorities and the 
other for hospitals  
 
2. The Joint Action VISTART, to promote and facilitate the harmonisation of inspection, 
authorisation and vigilance systems for blood, tissues and cells 
 
3. 
Eurobarometer reports outlining the European public's attitude to blood and tissue and cells 
donation and transfusion and/or application 
 
4. An EU-wide mapping exercise of the market for blood, blood components and plasma 
derivatives, focusing on their availability for patients 
 
5. Catie - Competent Authority Training of Inspections in Europe. The development of training 
sessions for inspectors in the field of blood and blood components 
 
6. EUOBU - A guide on EU Optimal Blood Use 
 
7. 
DOMAINE - A project to create a safe and sufficient donor population in Europe: comparing and 
recommending good donor management practice 
 
8. EuBIS - The development of pan-European standards and criteria for the inspection of blood 
establishments 
 
9. The development of a Pan-European standard operating procedure (SOP) for best practice in 
ensuring the quality and safety of blood 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
124 
Table 46. Donors, first time donors and inhabitants, 2019 
 
 
Table 47. Collection of whole blood, autologous blood and blood (apheresis) components, 2019 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
125 
Table 48. Profile of donations, 2019 
 
 
Table 49. Use of blood and blood components for transfusion, 2019 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
126 
Table 50. Special processing of blood components, 2019 
 
 
Table 51. Donation testing strategy for infectious agents – %, 2019 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
127 
Table 52. Donation testing strategy for infectious agents – % (continued), 2019 
 
 
Table 53. NAT testing, 2019 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
128 
Table 54. NAT testing (continued), 2019 
 
 
Conclusions 
Transfusion practices for TDT patients differ across countries and geographical regions of the world. This may 
be linked to (1) the availability of blood/packed RBCs and their accessibility to patients; (2) the expertise and 
attitudes of treating physicians; (3) costs of BT and national economies; (4) competing medical/public health 
priorities; (5) use of different transfusion guidelines or lack of adherence/implementation of guidelines. Very 
importantly, the differences in the quality of transfusion services may exist as a result of the differing standards 
related to the volume of RBCs contained in each unit and to differences in logistical factors. As a consequence, 
physicians, mainly in large countries, may provide more blood per session, thus extending the period between 
sessions. 
TIF’s work and other published information have demonstrated that the proportion of patients with TM 
receiving transfusion therapy for most of their lifetime is consistent across all geographical regions; however in 
the case of thalassaemia intermedia, patients receiving transfusion therapy for a large part of their lifetime is 
documented more in the South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions than in Europe or other parts of the 
world. This may be justified as patients with the more severe phenotype HbE/β-thalassaemia are most 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
129 
prevalent in these parts of the world, and consequently the needs for strengthening their BT services are indeed 
greater. 
 
The only well-established national survival data and age distribution cohorts are still those deriving from the 
national registries of Cyprus, Greece and Italy: 
 
• 
Cyprus – The median age was demonstrated to be 40.9 years (30/12/18) (Figures 40 & 41) [16,17], and 
patient survival rate is steady increasing as quality of care has improved through the years. 
• 
Greece - The median age was demonstrated to be 36–45 years for TM patients, 46–55 years for TI 
patients and 41–50 years for SCD patients (Figure 42) [18,19].  
• 
Italy – Amongst 3,986 patients in 36 centres (>50% of the total patient population), 68% of TM patients 
were aged ≥35 years and 11% ≤ 18 years (Figure 43) [20-23]. 
 
Cyprus 
 
Figure 27. Cyprus Thalassaemia Registry (care of Dr S. Christou 2006) 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
130 
 
Figure 28. Cyprus Thalassaemia Registry (care of Dr S. Christou 2020) 
 
Greece 
 
Figure 29. Age Distribution of Thalassaemia Patients in Greece. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Age
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Thal Major F
Thal Major M
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
131 
Italy 
 
Figure 30. Distribution of age in patients with thalassaemia syndromes in Italy (2017) 
 
In the United Kingdom, where optimal care is available and medical expertise exists in a patient-centreed 
universal coverage healthcare system with very robust BT services, still only around 50% of the patients are 
over 24 years old and a very small percentage are over 50 years [24]. 
 
Table 55. Thalassaemia registrations by commissioning hub (United Kingdom). Source: www.nhr.nhs.uk  
Region 
Registrations 
Region 
Registrations 
London 
853 
Thames Valley & Wessex 
50 
West Midlands 
261 
East of England 
40 
Northwest 
205 
Northeast & Cumbria 
23 
Yorkshire & Humber 
196 
Southwest 
17 
East Midlands 
99 
Southeast 
0 
 
 
 
 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
132 
 
Figure 31. Thalassaemia patients by age group (United Kingdom). Source: www.nhr.nhs.uk  
 
In Iran (Islamic Rep. of), which also maintains a national registry, in an analysis of 1,831 patients in Northern 
Iran (about 10% of the total patient population in the country), the mean age of patients was 30 ± 9.7 years, 
while in a larger study of 5,491 patients across the country, the mean age was only 23.8 ± 11.3 years [25,26]. 
In Taiwan (China), amongst 454 patients, the median age was 17.2 years (0.1–48.0 years), 58.1% of the patients 
being younger than 20 years [27]. 
Similarly, in Albania according to a report addressed to TIF in 2015, amongst 165 TDT patients of a single centre 
in the University of Tirana, the age of the patients was between 2 and 14 years [28]. 
Even though France maintains a national registry for thalassaemia, there has not been an update since 2010. 
In this report, 267 out of 378 patients with TM had a median age of 20 years. In an EHA abstract from 2019 
(patients were included between 01/01/2005–31/01/2019), from a total of 666 patients, 441 with TM, the median 
age was 23 years [29,30]. 
Thalassaemia is a relatively rare condition in Spain, but increasing migrations may alter this in the coming 
years. A national registry of haemoglobinopathies was created in 2014 and the first report was published in 
2017. The registry includes data on 715 patients of which the majority (615) have SCD and only 73 are recorded 
as having β-thalassaemia. The median age was 8.9 years (0.2–33.7) for thalassaemia. This age distribution is of 
course more in line with poorly developed health systems and developing countries. The rarity of the condition 
is the main reason and the need for organised services is evident [31]. 
In the context of Malaysia’s data, based on the most recent report of 2020 on 8,681 patients, the majority, 
64.45%, were in age groups between 0 and 24.9 years of age; the largest number of patients were aged between 
10.1 and 14.9 years (17.46%). This is across the whole spectrum of severity including HbE/ β-thalassaemia, TM, 
TI and HbH disease. Amongst TM, the peak age group is 10.0–14.9 years while for HbE/ β-thalassaemia is 15–20 
years [32]. 
Similarly, the greatest majority of patients in Maldives, which maintains a national registry, are also less than 
20 years old (2014 data) (From TIF records). 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
133 
 
 
Figure 32. Age distribution curve of thalassaemia major patients in the Maldives (2014) 
 
The age distribution of patients in Turkey from the national registry data of 2017, amongst 2,046 patients from 
27 thalassaemia centres, 95% of whom are β-thalassaemia major and 11.5% NTDT, the age of 72% of the above 
patients is below 20 years of age [33,34]. 
 
Figure 33. Age Distribution of patients in Turkey (2017) 
 
Sri Lanka has no national registry but in a recent report of 1,774 patients from 23 centres, 68.7% with β-
thalassaemia major and 20.3% with HbE/β-thalassaemia and 2% with sickle cell/ β-thalassaemia had an age 
distribution as follows [35]: 
• 
Mean age of β-thalassaemia major 13.2 years 
• 
Mean age of HbE /β-thalassaemia 21.5 years 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
134 
In Thailand, with an anticipated 40% of its population being carriers of thalassaemia (α and/or β and/or HbE), a 
retrospective analysis of the biggest Children’s Department at Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok between 1974 and 
2014 regarding morbidity levels extracted the following information through the national database: 
• 
Out of a total of 4,303 patients with thalassaemia, 2,623, 317, 691 and 672 had β-thalassaemia/HbE, β-
thalassaemia major, HbH disease and HbH/Constant Spring, respectively.  
• 
β-thalassaemia major had the highest death rate (7.5 x over population controls) followed by β-
thalassaemia/HbE (3.1x), while patients with α-thalassaemia (HbH and HbH/HbCS) had the same 
mortality as the non-thalassaemic population.  
• 
The majority of β-thalassaemia major patients died from anaemia, suggesting that most patients are 
receiving inadequate transfusion support (Figure 47) [36]. 
 
 
Figure 34. Survival of thalassemia patients in Thailand 
 
 
These findings suggest that management, including transfusion therapy, which is the cornerstone of 
management of severe TDT syndromes across the world, and in particular in the developing world 
where more than 80% of this patient population lives, remains quite suboptimal and indicates the 
need for urgent action. This is necessary to improve the standard of care and enhance the long-term 
survival of this population of patients with a highly prevalent condition. Contrary to many other 
thousands of rare diseases, for haemoglobin disorders there is ample and reliable knowledge and 
experience on how to effectively prevent the disease and appropriately treat the patients. The data 
described in this chapter demonstrate beyond any doubt that the human and patients’ rights for 
equal access to quality healthcare, as described within the UN and the WHO resolutions and/or 
declarations and ratified by almost every country around the globe, are hugely violated. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
135 
 
A study reported that approximately 25,000 TD children are born with β-thalassaemia worldwide each year, and 
only 3,000 (11.7%) actually receive blood transfusions [37]. As a direct consequence, many of these die each 
year, with the highest mortality rates being in the SEAR and EMR regions, estimated in 2008 by the WHO at 
9,021 and 7,443 deaths each year respectively [37].  
Adverse events associated with BT can be acute (e.g., haemolytic, infectious shock and severe allergic 
reactions) or delayed (e.g., TTI’s alloimmunization and disease related to iron load, cardiac, hepatic and 
endocrine dysfunctions.) Absence of appropriate reporting grossly underestimates the incidence of such 
transfusion-related adverse reactions and poses challenges in promoting corrective measures.  
Many developing countries have shown a substantial increase of VNRBD practices. Nonetheless, there is still a 
big gap between volume of blood collected and increasing clinical demand for blood. These countries share the 
common challenge of how to best utilise the limited financial resources to improve blood safety and availability 
for their populations. 
In conclusion, appropriate/clinical use of blood, patient management programmes, quality systems, 
integrating health economics and evidence-based budgeting, and provision of updated training and education 
of healthcare professionals constitute all essential tools that are missing or partially absent from all countries, 
particularly of the developing world (low, lower-middle and middle-income countries) [38]. These, in addition 
with inadequate country level data, consequent to the absence of national registries, patient healthcare 
records, and well-structured haemovigilance programmes, constitute multiple challenges. 
 
TIF’s Patient Voice – A Global Perspective 
The patients’ perspective, reflected in the responses of 3,200 patients from 48 National Thalassaemia 
Associations, in 42 countries and five regions of the world, to a TIF questionnaire conducted between January–
December 10, 2018, indicated the great challenges faced in the area of BT. 
 
Figure 35. Response demographics to TIF’s survey to document unmet needs 
GLOBALLY, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE CARRIER RATES AND THE CALCULATED ANTICIPATED 
ANNUAL AFFECTED BIRTHS, IT APPEARS CERTAIN THAT A SIGNIFICANT PERCENTAGE OF TD 
PATIENTS DIE ANNUALLY AS A RESULT OF SUBOPTIMAL CARE INCLUDING INADEQUATE OR 
INAPPROPRIATE TRANSFUSIONS [37]. 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
136 
 
Figure 36. Unmet patient needs as documented by TIF’s global survey. 
 
The Patient Voice – A Global Perspective 
The patients’ perspective, reflected in the responses of 2,200 patients from 48 National Thalassaemia 
Associations, in 42 countries and five regions of the world, to a TIF questionnaire conducted between January–
December 10 2023, indicated that, despite big or small improvements in a number of parameters studied, many 
great challenges faced in the area of BT therapy still exist and multiple efforts from a number of relevant 
stakeholders, including patients organisations are needed to address them effectively. 
 
 
Figure 37. Response demographics to TIF’s survey to document unmet needs 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
137 
 
 
Figure 38. Unmet patient needs as documented by TIF’s global survey 
Last but not least, the WHO Action framework to advance universal access to safe, effective and quality-assured 
blood products 2020–2023 aims to provide a strategic direction to global efforts to address present barriers to 
the safety and availability of blood products. The WHO Action Framework aligns with the WHO 13th General 
Programme of Work 2019–2023 and the WHO five-year plan to help build effective and efficient regulatory 
systems (Delivering Quality-Assured Medical Products for All 2019–2023), and speaks to the implementation of 
a series of national, regional and international resolutions, goals and strategies to ensure safe blood as an 
integral component to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Reaching the overall goal of 
universal access to safe, effective and quality-assured blood products can only be achieved through 
effective collaboration between WHO, its Member States and relevant organisations. The WHO will be 
drawing on new and existing partners globally in its efforts to coordinate the implementation of this global 
framework to ensure access to safe blood products worldwide, in accordance with the following strategic 
objectives [39]. 
 
 
 
THE SIX STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES ARE: 
1. 
an appropriately structured, well-coordinated and sustainably resourced national blood system 
2. an appropriate national framework of regulatory controls, national standards and quality 
assessment programmes 
3. 
Functioning and efficiently managed blood services 
4. effective implementation of patient blood management to optimize clinical practice of 
transfusion 
5. Effective surveillance, haemovigilance and pharmacovigilance, supported by comprehensive and 
accurate data collection systems 
6. partnerships, collaboration and information exchange to achieve key priorities and jointly 
address challenges and emerging threats at global, regional and national levels 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
138 
TIF will continue to work with WHO, which is performing a significant role in this area, and with other relevant 
stakeholders to support the quality of transfusion therapy that patients with these conditions receive in every 
country of the world and in particular in the lower-middle income countries where more than 80% of this patient 
population lives. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
139 
REFERENCES 
Most data were taken from: World Health 
Organisation. Global Status Report on Blood 
Safety and Availability 2021. 
1. 
Geographical variations in current clinical 
practice on transfusions and iron chelation 
therapy 
across 
various 
transfusion-
dependent anaemias, Vip Viprakasit et al. 
Blood Transfus. 2013 Jan; 11(1): 108–122. 
doi: 10.2450/2012.0012-12 
2. SHOT 2019, 23 Haemoglobin Disorders 
(p.186-190)  
3. 
Demographics of Blood Transfusion in 
Lebanon: 
A 
Retrospective 
Study. 
Mahmoud El-Hussein, Chady El-Tawil, Jad 
Kassem, Cima Hamieh, AbdulKarim El 
Karaaoui, 
Naji 
Souaiby. 
Annals 
of 
Biological Sciences 2020, 8(2):44-49 
4. Republic of Lebanon, Ministry of Public 
https://www.moph.gov.lb/en/Pages/4/326
2/blood-transfusion-  
5. Source of blood and its consumption at 
King Khalid University Hospital, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Abdel 
Gader A M, Al Ghumlas AK. Journal of 
Nature and Science of Medicine. Wolters 
Kluwer Medknow Publications. Jan 1, 
2020;23-32 
6. Blood supply in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia– 
self-sufficiency 
and 
safety 
considerations. Abel Galil M. Abdel Gader, 
Farga H Alqahtani, Abdulmajeed A. 
Albanayian. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Hematology 2011 
7. 
Determinants 
of 
blood 
donation 
willingness in the European Union: a 
cross-country perspective on perceived 
transfusion 
safety, 
concerns, 
and 
incentives. Elisabeth M.J. Huis in ‘t Veld, 
Wim L.A.M. de Kort, Eva Maria Merz  
8. Status of blood transfusion services in 
Iran. A. Gharehbaghian, H. Abolghasemi, 
M. Tabrizi Namini. Asian J Transfus 
Sci. 2008 
Jan; 2(1): 
13–
17. doi: 10.4103/0973-6247.39505. 
PMCID: PMC2798758. 
Article PubReaderCite 
9. WHO EMR. Availability and safety of 
blood transfusion during humanitarian 
emergencies. Yetmgeta Abdella, Rana 
Hajjeh and Cees Th. Smit Sibinga  
10. Blood Donor Management in China. Shi 
Ling, Wang Jingxing, Liu Zhong, et al. 
Transfusion Medicine and Hemotherapy. 
Karger Publishers. Jul 4, 2014;273-282 
11. Challenges and Research in Managing 
Blood 
Supply 
in 
China. Yongming 
Zhu,Dongfu 
Xie,Xun 
Wang,Kaicheng 
Qian. Transfusion Medicine Reviews. 
31(2017);84-88 
12. PEPFAR Cambodia Blood Safety Program 
2013-2018. 
Final 
Project 
Report. 
Australian Red Cross Blood Service. 
February 2018  
13. Kingdom 
of 
Cambodia. 
National 
guidelines for transfusion practice. Edition 
2. July 2014. Ministry of Health, National 
Blood Transfusion Centre in Cambodia. 
PEPFAR 
14. Nguyen HN. Thalassemia in Vietnam. Ann 
Transl 
Med 
2015;3(S2):AB035. 
doi: 
10.3978/j.issn.2305-5839.2015.AB035 
15. Supply of Blood for Transfusion in Latin 
American and Caribbean Countries, 2014 
and 2015. ISBN 978-92-75-11958-7. Pan 
American Health Organization.  
16. Paul Telfer, Petros Kountouris, Soteroula 
Christou, Marina Kleanthous. Changing 
causes of mortality in TDT during the era 
of oral chelation therapy 2000-2018. EHA 
Learning Centre. 2019; 266584 
17. Kountouris P., Michaelidou K. Christou S. 
Hadjigavriel M. Sitarou M., Kolnagou A. 
Kleanthous M., Telfter P. Effect of HBB 
genotype on survival in a cohort of 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassaemia 
patients in Cyprus. Haematologica 2020 
Jul 30:260224 Epub ahead of print 
PMID:32732363  
18. Fig. 1 Distribution of registered cases in 
the NRHG according to age groups. The 
National 
Registry 
for 
Haemoglobinopathies in Greece (NRHG) 
19. Voskaridou E, Kattamis A, Fragodimitri C, 
Kourakli A, Chalkia P et al. National 
registry of hemoglobinopathies in Greece: 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
140 
updated demographics, current trends in 
affected births, and causes of mortality. 
Ann Hematol. 2019; 98(1):55-66. doi: 
10.1007/s00277-018-3493-4 
20. Fig. 1. Distribution of age of patients with 
thalassaemia syndromes at 36 treatment 
centers in Italy  
21. Borgna-Pignatti C, Rugolotto S, De 
Stefano P, Piga A, Di Gregorio F, 
Gamberini MR, Sabato V, Melevendi C, 
Cappellini MD, Verlato G. Survival and 
disease complications in thalassemia 
major. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998; 850:227-31. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb10479.x. 
PMID: 9668544. 
22. Longo F, Corrieri P, Origa R, Barella S, 
Sanna PMG, Bitti PP, Zuccarelli A, 
Commendatore FV, Vitucci A, Quarta A, 
Lisi R, Cappellini MD, Massei F, Forni GL, 
Piga A. Changing patterns of thalassaemia 
in Italy: a WebThal perspective. Blood 
Transfus. 2020. doi: 10.2450/2020.0143-
20. PMID: 33196416. 
23. Conte R, Ruggieri L, Gambino A, Bartoloni 
F, Baiardi P, Bonifazi D, Bonifazi F, Felisi M, 
Giannuzzi V, Padula R, Pepe A, Putti MC, 
Del Vecchio GC, Maggio A, Filosa A, Iacono 
A, Mangiarini L, Ceci A. The Italian 
multiregional 
thalassemia 
registry: 
Centers characteristics, services, and 
patients' population. Hematology. 2016; 
21(7):415-24. 
doi: 
10.1080/10245332.2015.1101971. 
PMID: 
26863102. 
24. Jobanputra M., Paramore C., Laird SG, Mc 
Gahan M., Telfer P.  Co-morbidities and 
mortality associated with transfusion-
dependent beta-thalassaemia in patients 
in England: a 10-year retrospective cohort 
analysis, B J Haematol 2020 PMID: 
33094842  
25. Iran age distribution. Kosaryan M., Karami 
H., Darvishi-Khezri H., Akbarzadeh R., 
Aliasgharian A., Bromand K. Treatment 
Status of Patients with B-Thalassemia 
Major in Northern Iran. Iran J Public 
Health.2019;48(7):1335-1345. 
PMD:31497556 
26. Ansari-Moghaddam A., Adineh 
HA., 
Zareban I., Mohammadi M.,  Maghsoodlu 
M. The survival rate of patients with beta-
thalassemia major and intermedia and its 
trends in recent years in Iran. Epidemol 
Health 
2018; 
40: 
e2018048. 
doi:10.4178/epih.e2018048.PMID:303366
63 
27. Figure 1. Survival probability of patients 
with thalassaemia major in Taiwan (2007-
2011). Wu HP, Lin CL, Chang YC, Wu KH, 
Lei RL, Peng CT, Weng T, Tai YM, Chao YH. 
Survival and complication rates in patients 
with thalassemia major in Taiwan. Pediatr 
Blood Cancer. 2017 Jan;64(1):135-138. doi: 
10.1002/pbc.26181. PMID: 27571924. 
28. Some 
biological 
data 
on 
heamoglobinopathic patients of Albania. 
Manika Face-Kraeka, Eleni Nastas Anina 
Godo Bledi Kreka, Elizana Petrela, Anjeza 
Kalaci 
29. Thuret I, Pondarré C, Loundou A, 
Steschenko D, Girot R, Bachir D, Rose C, 
Barlogis V, Donadieu J, de Montalembert 
M, Hagege I, Pegourie B, Berger C, 
Micheau M, Bernaudin F, Leblanc T, Lutz L, 
Galactéros F, Siméoni MC, Badens C. 
Complications and treatment of patients 
with β-thalassemia in France: results of 
the National Registry. Haematologica. 
2010; 
95(5):724-9. 
doi: 
10.3324/haematol.2009.018051. 
PMID: 
20007138. 
30. Agouti I, Thuret I, Bernit E, Galacteros F et 
al. Data from the French registry for beta-
thalassemia 
patients. 
EHA 
Learning 
Center. Badens C. Jun 14, 2019; 266587 
31. Cela E, Bellón JM, de la Cruz M, Beléndez 
C, Berrueco R, Ruiz A, Elorza I, Díaz de 
Heredia C, Cervera A, Vallés G, Salinas JA, 
Coll MT, Bermúdez M, Prudencio M, 
Argilés 
B, 
Vecilla 
C; 
SEHOP-
Hemoglobinopathies 
Study 
Group 
(Sociedad Española de Hematología y 
Oncología Pediátricas). National registry 
of 
hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Spain 
(REPHem). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2017; 
64(7). doi: 10.1002/pbc.26322. PMID: 
27804209. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
141 
32. Mohd Ibrahim H, Muda Z, Othman IS, 
Mohamed Unni MN, Teh KH, Thevarajah 
A, Gunasagaran K, Ong GB, Yeoh SL, 
Muhammad Rivai A, Che Mohd Razali CH, 
Din ND, Abdul Latiff Z, Jamal R, Mohamad 
N, Mohd Ariffin H, Alias H. Observational 
study 
on 
the 
current 
status 
of 
thalassaemia in Malaysia: a report from 
the Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry. BMJ 
Open. 
2020; 
10(6):e037974. 
doi: 
10.1136/bmjopen-2020-037974. 
PMID: 
32601117. 
33. Aydınok Y, Oymak Y, Atabay B, Aydoğan 
G, Yeşilipek A, Ünal S, Kılınç Y, Oflaz B, et 
al. A National Registry of Thalassemia in 
Turkey: 
Demographic 
and 
Disease 
Characteristics 
of 
Patients, 
Achievements, 
and 
Challenges 
in 
Prevention. Turk J Haematol. 2018; 
35(1):12-18. doi: 10.4274/tjh.2017.0039. 
PMID: 28404539. 
34. A National Registry of Thalassemia in 
Turkey: 
Demographic 
and 
Disease 
Characteristics 
of 
Patients, 
Achievements, 
and 
Challenges 
in 
Prevention. DOI: 10.4274/tjh.2017.0039. 
Turk J Hematol 2018;35:12-18. Aydinok 
Yesim, Oymak Yesim, Atabay Berna, 
Aydoğan Gönül, Yesilipek Mehmet, Ünal 
Selma, Kilinç Yurdanur, Ofaz Banu, Akın 
Mehmet, Vergin Canan, Evim Melike, 
Çalışkan Ümran, Ünal Şule, Bay Ali, Güler 
Kazancı Elif, Ileri Talia, Atay Didem, 
Patıroğlu 
Türkan, 
Kahraman 
Selda, 
Karakaş Zeynep. 
35. Premawardhana AP, Mudiyanse R, De 
Silva ST, Jiffry N, Nelumdeniya U, de Silva 
U, et al. (2019) A nationwide survey of 
hospital-based thalassemia patients and 
standards of care and a preliminary 
assessment of the national prevention 
program in Sri Lanka. PLoS ONE 14(8): e 
36. Survival in patients with thalassaemia 
syndromes 
in 
Thailand 
1961-2013. 
Jansutjawan S. & Viprakasit V. manuscript 
in preparation 2017 
37. Farrukh T Shah, Farzana Sayani, Sara 
Trompeter, Emma Drasar, Challenges of 
blood transfusions in β-thalassemia., 
doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2019.100588. 
PMID: 31324412.  
38. Custer B, Zou S, Glynn SA, et al. 
Addressing gaps in international blood 
availability and transfusion safety in low- 
and middle-income countries: a NHLBI 
workshop. Transfusion. 2018;58(5):1307-
1317. doi:10.1111/trf.14598 
39. WHO. Action framework to advance 
universal access to safe, effective and 
quality-assured blood products 2020–
2023 
BLOOD – THE GLOBAL SCENE 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
142 
ANNEX I 
Class of Recommendation 
I. 
There is evidence and/or general agreement that a given treatment or procedure is beneficial, useful, 
effective 
II. 
There is conflicting evidence and/or a divergence of opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of the given 
treatment or procedure 
III. 
The weight of evidence is in favour of usefulness/efficacy and therefore should be considered 
IV. 
The usefulness/efficacy is less well established by evidence/opinion and therefore may be considered 
V. 
There is evidence or general agreement that the given treatment or procedure is not useful/effective, 
and in some cases may be harmful 
 
Level of Evidence 
A. Data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta-analyses.  
B. Data derived from a single randomized clinical trial or large non-randomized studies.  
C. Consensus of opinion of the experts and/or small studies, retrospective studies, registries. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
143 
 
 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
144 
5. IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA:  
ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., & Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Iron Toxicity 
Iron toxicity to vital organs represents, along with severe anaemia, the basic pathophysiological consequences 
of ineffective erythropoiesis in thalassaemia. As such reduction of iron load is a major therapeutic target for 
thalassaemia patients1. Iron accumulates because of increased absorption of dietary iron from the gut in non-
transfusion dependent thalassaemia (NTDT), such as β-thalassaemia intermedia and α-thalassaemia, and more 
importantly because of repetitive blood transfusions due to the breakdown of transfused red blood cells in 
transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT). Normally, only 1-2 mg of iron is absorbed from dietary sources daily 
and the same amount is excreted via the stools, thus preserving iron homeostasis. In contrast, each unit of 
transfused blood contains 200 mg of iron (0.47mg/ml), and thus regularly transfused patients inevitably develop 
iron overload. Iron excess saturates the binding and transferring capacity of the iron-binding protein transferrin, 
leading to the development of non-transferrin bound iron (NTBI) [1]. Contrary to protein-bound iron that is 
stored mainly in the liver and is not toxic, NTBI, and especially the species known as labile plasma iron (LPI), is 
taken up by cells, such as cardiomyocytes, hepatocytes and the cells of endocrine glands, in an uncontrolled 
manner, leading to oxidative organelle damage, cell dysfunction and death. As a result, serious complications 
develop, which if not detected early and managed appropriately, may become debilitating and cause 
premature death in TDT patients. In NTDT, iron overload due to increased iron absorption develops at a much 
slower rate leading to complications later in life, mostly in the second and third decades [2]. 
 
 
 
 
The major organs affected by iron toxicity are: 
• 
The HEART, in which iron toxicity manifests as cardiac dysfunction, heart failure and arrhythmia. Iron 
overload cardiomyopathy remains the main cause of death in TDT patients, even though it has been 
considerably reduced under current monitoring and treatment regimens [3, 4]. 
• 
The LIVER, in which damaged hepatocytes are replaced over time by fibrous tissue, increasing 
substantially the risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer, which represents an important cause of 
morbidity and mortality in TDT patients especially in the older age group of patients [5]. 
• 
ENDOCRINE GLANDS are affected in varying degrees in the majority of thalassaemia patients. Iron 
overload 
causes 
several 
endocrine 
disorders, 
either 
directly 
or 
indirectly, 
through 
the 
hypothalamus/pituitary 
axis 
including 
growth 
retardation, 
hypogonadism, 
hypothyroidism, 
hypoparathyroidism and diabetes mellitus [6,7,8]. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
145 
Controlling Iron Toxicity 
Developing a protocol to control the toxic effects of iron overload requires the adoption of two measures: 
1. 
Monitoring the accumulation of iron, thus allowing for the early detection of iron overload as well as 
the follow-up of iron chelation therapy. This is achieved by a series of tests, both biochemical (mainly 
serum ferritin and transferrin saturation) and imaging (MRI techniques to measure tissue iron content). 
2. Removing free iron by drugs that bind to it and facilitate its excretion through urine or faeces. These 
substances are known as chelating agents and the only way to prevent tissue damage is by the daily 
consumption of these agents. The chelating agents in common use are: 
• 
Desferrioxamine (DFO), a parenteral medication administered by slow subcutaneous 
infusion, ideally over 24 hours, but for practical purposes over 10-12 hours. Such an 
administration requires a portable infusion pump along with reconstitution and dilution of the 
powdered substance at home. In a hospital setting, DFO may be given intravenously as a 
continuous infusion, usually as a rescue treatment in severe iron overload, especially when 
severe heart failure symptoms develop.  
• 
Deferiprone (DFP) is an orally administered medication given in three divided doses. 
• 
Deferasirox (DFX) is another orally administered medication given on a once-daily basis. 
 
Combinations of these drugs are also used, especially when iron overload is significant and does not respond 
well to monotherapy [9]. 
It has also been amply demonstrated that well managed iron chelation can effectively reduce iron and its toxic 
effects. In a study from Turkey comparing the impact of using MRI techniques to guide iron chelation therapy, 
from 2006 to 2019, patients with safe LIC values (< 7 mg/g dw) increased from 57 to 77%, and safe cT2* values 
(> 20 ms) increased from 72 to 86% [10].  
Adjuvants to chelation therapy, enhancing the effect of the aforementioned chelating agents, have been 
reported, although not universally used and not established in clinical practice. Eltrombopag combined with 
deferasirox and amlodipine combined with standard chelation regimens are two examples [11,12, 13]. 
 
Determinants of Effective Iron Overload Monitoring and Treatment 
Effective control of iron overload is hampered by factors, which are dependent on organisational and financial 
support, but also on awareness among physicians and patients. These factors include: 
• 
Availability of reliable iron monitoring tools. In many treatment centres, only serum ferritin is used to 
monitor iron overload, which can be influenced by other factors, such as liver disease and inflammation 
and is not a reliable surrogate or cardiac iron content. Serum biomarkers of iron loading especially 
affecting the heart such as ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide); BNP (brain natriuretic peptide); GDF-15 
(Growth Differentiation Factor 15); and NT-pro-BNP (N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide) as well 
as imaging biomarkers using MRI, have been extensively studied for the timely diagnosis of danger to 
vital organs [14]. Expensive technologies, such as MRI, are required for the reliable detection and 
monitoring of iron accumulation in vital organs, including heart and liver. In addition, iron monitoring 
should be part of a well-structured multidisciplinary care (MDC) plan carried out by a team that, 
besides the thalassaemia-treating physician, includes at least a cardiologist, an endocrinologist and a 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
146 
hepatologist, along with psychosocial support services. For more information see Chapter on 
Multidisciplinary Care.  
• 
Availability of iron chelation agents. Availability may be hampered by lack of drug licensing or approval 
by local regulatory authorities, impaired procurement by budgetary restrictions that limit supplies, or 
lack of coverage by local insurance systems that imposes out-of-pocket payment by the patients [15]. 
Several countries report to TIF a lack of constant supply of the various chelating agents. 
Discontinuation of a drug leads to the discontinuation of iron chelation an increase in iron overload 
and toxicity. One country that reports this as a major factor affecting patient outcomes is Iran and this 
may be affected by the economic embargo, which is currently in effect, even though there is a local 
production of chelating agents, but raw materials are imported. [information from an October 2022 
meeting with HCPs and patients]. The quality of locally produced drugs is questioned by both patients 
and physicians. 
• 
Professional knowledge and awareness of evidence-based practices and standards of care. 
Inexperience and inadequate knowledge of physicians is a phenomenon that is not well documented 
in scientific publications but is common where rare conditions are concerned [16]. 
• 
Adherence to prescribed treatment. Lack of patients’ adherence to prescribed chelation regimens [17]. 
The requirement is for daily chelation since even short interruptions lead to the exposure of cells to 
free iron radicals. Various interventions have been suggested to reduce this phenomenon, mainly 
relying on psychosocial support and patient participation in management decisions. Such patient 
support is lacking in many clinics globally. Particular emphasis is given on this parameter in this 
chapter, being part of a review study compiled by a patient-oriented organisation – TIF. 
 
Global Inequalities in Iron Overload Monitoring and Treatment 
There are significant inequalities in the care of thalassaemia patients, which in turn result in variable patient 
outcomes. In countries where optimal care is available and accessible, the effective control of iron toxicity has 
led to a dramatic increase in patients’ survival [18], leading to the gradual rise of an ageing patient population 
who are now facing new age-related complications [19]. Given the fact that 80% of thalassaemia patients live 
in limited-resource countries where state-of-art healthcare may not be the norm, the Thalassaemia 
International Federation (TIF) has conducted a search into the availability of iron overload monitoring and 
treatment resources in TIF member countries, to identify unmet needs and provide member organisations and 
health authorities with advice on policy making. 
Measuring performance and outcomes was based on information provided by local service providers, unless 
official reports at health administration level have been published. At this point, it should be stressed that 
published reports on thalassaemia care and outcomes are generally confined to few countries and isolated 
centres, mostly those with good results to report. Evidence on accessibility and affordability of effective iron 
overload control remains largely unknown for thousands of thalassaemia patients who face the risk of 
premature death and poor quality of life due to lack of access to quality services and professional expertise. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
147 
METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS 
The investigation of availability and effectiveness of iron overload control is a challenge, which is met by using 
more than one source of information. A literature search regarding both monitoring and the availability of iron 
chelation was supplemented by reports collected from TIF delegation visits as well as reports sent by member 
associations. Countries, which at the time of writing were in a state of political instability or war have been 
excluded. These countries include Syria, Libya, Yemen and Iraq. Since, however, they have a high prevalence of 
thalassaemia syndromes, the situation in these territories is analysed separately, and TIF’s efforts to alleviate 
their situation is discussed. A total of 56 countries were investigated by the methods described below 
[References 19-50]. 
In this global study, TIF has collected data covering 3 domains: 
• 
Availability of essential resources and services for controlling iron overload, including monitoring and 
chelation, in high prevalence countries. 
• 
Effectiveness of iron chelation. 
• 
Patient adherence. 
The methodology followed for each domain and the generated results are reported in detail as follows: 
 
Availability 
The main elements of this investigation include (i) whether the currently established chelating agents are 
approved and available to patients free of charge; (ii) whether monitoring is also available and free; (iii) whether 
monitoring is carried out in a regular manner so as to be effective in predicting complications. The compounded 
results of this investigation have resulted in the development of a scoring system to describe the availability of 
the basic components of iron overload control. This scoring system is summarized below in Table 1(i). A total 
maximum score of 45 indicates a country that provides the means for optimal control of iron overload 
monitoring and treatment. 
 
Table 1. Scoring methodology for iron load monitoring (s. Ferritin/MRI) and treatment (chelation drugs) 
Scoring Methodology 
3 units are given for each available drug 
3 units are given for iron chelation provision free of charge 
Number of Available Drugs (3 are authorised*) 
Score 
If only 3 
9 (3x3) 
If only 2 
6 (3 x 2) 
If only 1 
3 (3 x 1) 
Cost of Provided Drugs 
Score 
All 3 free 
9 
Only two provided free 
6 
Only one provided free 
3 
 
 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
148 
Co-Payment Policies 
Score 
Chelators paid by patients 
0 
Co-payment is the policy for one chelator 
3 
Co-payment is the policy for two chelators 
1 
Co-payment is the policy for three chelators 
0 
Serum Ferritin Testing Frequency 
Score 
Every 3 months 
9 
Every 6 months 
6 
Annually 
3 
Longer than annually 
0 
MRI Testing Frequency 
Score 
Annually 
9 
Biennially (every 2 years) 
3 
Longer than biennially (every 2 years) 
0 
MRI Testing Cost 
Score 
Free for all patients 
9 
Less than 10% co-payment (of full cost) 
6 
10% - 30% co-payment (of full cost) 
3 
30% - 50% co-payment (of full cost) 
1 
More than 50% co-payment (of full cost) 
0 
*Desferrioxamine, Deferiprone and Deferasirox 
**In the absence of quality assured measurements the score is zero, but, unfortunately, it was not possible to 
retrieve reliable information on MRI/MRI software validation. 
***Near ideal optimal services for iron monitoring and treatment is scored with 45 units. 
 
Based on that scoring exercise (Table 1), grading of availability of iron load monitoring and treatment was 
attempted (Table 2). 
Table 2. Scoring and grades 
Countries scoring >36 units are graded as A and anticipated based on their high level 
of services’ availability to provide near optimal chelation monitoring and chelation 
therapy. Similarly, B grade countries can be considered as providing adequate 
services and which with more efforts could reach near optimal levels. Countries 
graded C and D are those that need to commit considerably more efforts and focus 
on improvements and are anticipated to have a young patient population, thus lower 
survival rates and higher morbidity levels. 
This score, however, does not take into consideration factors related to effectiveness and others such as 
physician compliance with guidelines or patient adherence to prescribed medications. MDC is not guaranteed 
either. For these reasons, this scoring system can only estimate the opportunity for quality patient care. (For 
the above additional important factors, a separate in-depth analysis is provided in the respective chapters on 
Multidisciplinary Care and Reference/Expert Centres of this Report). 
 
 
SCORE 
GRADE 
36 
A 
20-45 
B 
10-20 
C 
<10 
D 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
149 
Using the above scoring system, the various countries / territories have been graded between A-D according to 
their score with respect to the availability of services as noted in Table 2 and shown in Table 3 below: 
Table 3. Availability of monitoring for and treatment of iron overload 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Availability 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Availability 
Austria 
VH 
B 
Jordan 
H 
A 
Bulgaria 
VH 
A 
Lebanon 
H 
A 
Cyprus 
VH 
A 
Tunisia 
H 
B 
France 
VH 
A 
Maldives 
H 
B 
Germany 
VH 
A 
Sri Lanka 
H 
B 
Greece 
VH 
A 
Thailand 
H 
A 
Israel 
VH 
A 
China 
H 
D 
Italy 
VH 
A 
Taiwan, China 
VH 
B 
Netherland 
VH 
A 
Brazil 
H 
A 
Romania 
VH 
B 
Trinidad & Tobago 
H 
B 
Spain 
VH 
A 
Mauritius 
H 
C 
United Kingdom 
VH 
A 
Algeria 
H 
D 
Sweden 
VH 
B 
South Africa 
M 
D 
Saudi Arabia 
VH 
A 
Viet Nam 
M 
D 
Kuwait 
VH 
B 
Philippines 
M 
C 
Oman 
VH 
A 
Lao 
M 
D 
Qatar 
VH 
A 
Cambodia 
M 
D 
United Arab Emirates 
VH 
A 
Myanmar 
M 
D 
Australia 
VH 
A 
Nepal 
M 
D 
Brunei Dur 
VH 
B 
Indonesia 
M 
C 
Malaysia 
VH 
A 
India 
M 
C 
Singapore 
VH 
B 
Bangladesh 
M 
D 
Canada 
VH 
A 
Sudan 
L 
D 
USA 
VH 
A 
Palestine 
L 
C 
Albania 
H 
C 
Pakistan 
M 
D 
Azerbaijan 
H 
C 
Morocco 
M 
C 
Turkey 
H 
A 
Egypt 
M 
C 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
H 
B 
Afghanistan 
L 
D 
HDI: Human Development index; VH: very high; H: high; M: medium; L: low. SF: serum ferritin; LIC: Liver iron 
concentration. 
 
 
 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
150 
As previously stressed, the scoring and grading in Table 1(i) and Table 1(ii) indicate availability of basic services 
and not how effectively they are used. Availability is mainly related to the Human Development index (HDI). 
According to this study: 
• 
5% of patients live in Very High HDI countries / territories. 
• 
Poor or no availability of one or more iron chelating agents is reported in 9 / 31 countries / territories in 
the High to Low HDI group (29%). 
• 
MRI availability and regular use of this monitoring tool are questionable for 10,983 (26%) patients living 
in Very High HDI countries / territories, 234,408 (69%) patients living in High HDI countries / territories 
and 100% of patients living in medium/low HDI countries / territories. 
• 
Patient support for free chelation is offered in all but one country in the Very High HDI countries, based 
on universal health coverage. Singapore is the only country where health insurance is private and co-
payment policy is the rule (including MRI for iron overload). 
• 
Iron chelation is free in Iran, but only if locally produced agents are used. There is co-payment if original 
drugs are used. 
• 
The generic iron chelators produced in Iran (Islamic Republic of), India, Turkey, other countries of the 
Eastern Mediterranean Region and elsewhere have not been adequately tested for effectiveness and 
safety. TIF receives concerns from patients regarding both these issues. This may have an impact on 
long-term iron chelation effectiveness and complication rates. 
 
 
Figure 1. Map grading the availability of the monitoring/ treatment of iron overload across the globe (2024) 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
151 
Effectiveness 
As previously mentioned, beyond the availability of resources and services there is a further need to assess the 
effectiveness of iron overload control strategies since many factors mentioned earlier may lead to ineffective 
use of the agents, and thus impaired patient outcomes, in terms of morbidity, quality of life and mortality. 
The first parameter examined was the mean age of patients, which is an indicator of success of total 
management but for which iron chelation is a major contributor. The countries / territories were divided 
according to the age of their patient population. Additional parameters included the range of serum ferritin 
levels, organ iron deposition (liver and heart) and most common medical complications including those of the 
heart and liver. Heart complications were considered to be reported as heart failure or arrhythmias. Liver 
complications were considered to be reported as fibrosis/cirrhosis, hepatic failure or hepatocellular carcinoma. 
An effort was made to collect all parameters from publications or other reports, such as TIF’s delegation visits 
and presentations in TIF’s regional and international conferences by local experts (see also analysis of patients’ 
responses in an MRI specific survey held in October 2019 - in the ‘Global review of MRI services for thalassaemia 
chapter). The corresponding scoring system used to grossly code these parameters is presented in Table 4. 
Table 4. Scoring methodology to assess effectiveness of iron overload control (monitoring and measuring) 
Mean Age (Years) 
Score 
Mean Serum Ferratin 
(NG/L) 
Score 
Mean Liver Iron 
Concentration (NG/G 
DW) 
Score 
Mean MRT T2* Heart 
(MS)
Score 
Heart Complications 
(% Patients) 
Score 
Mean Liver 
Complications (% 
Patients) 
Score 
>30 
12 
<1000 
6 
<3 
6 
 
6 
<10 
6 
<5 
6 
20-
30 
6 
1-
2000 
3 
3-7 
3 
 
3 
11-20 
3 
6-10 
3 
15-
20 
2 
2-
3000 
1 
7-15 
1 
 
1 
21-30 
1 
10-20 
1 
<15 
0 
>3000 
0 
>15 
0 
 
0 
>30 
0 
>20 
0 
 
Based on the above scoring methodology, countries were graded A – D (Table 3) according to their accumulated 
score, as explained in Table 4 and presented in Table 3 (under the title “Effectiveness”). 
 
Table 5. Grading based on Table 4 scoring 
A very important limitation to this approach was the 
paucity of evidence, since not all countries / territories 
collect national data; in fact, very few centres keep a 
registry to collect reliable information on all their 
patients. In addition, not all countries / territories have 
MRI results and even fewer report MRI results. It was 
thus to-date not possible to grade the majority of the countries / territories with respect to the effectiveness of 
their iron overload control policies. Such scoring, and despite being grossly calculated, demonstrates that 
countries / territories with a mean age of their patient population >30 years are most likely to score A and B in 
addressing effectively or quite effectively iron monitoring and chelation treatment. Scoring of A or B however 
was only possible to be reported for very few countries including Cyprus, Italy, Greece and the United Kingdom 
Score 
Grade 
30-42 
A 
20-30 
B 
10-20 
C 
<10 
D 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
152 
where results of the relevant parameters shown in Table 4 were available through published literature. For a 
number of other countries only the age distribution was made available either in published data or through 
official TIF’s reports, and in their greatest majority a mean age of less than or around 20 years of age was 
reported i.e. grade C or D (as shown in Table 6 below and maps A and B at the end of this chapter) parallel to 
the grading of the services’ availability. It is evident that almost every country that scores A or B in service 
availability demonstrates levels A or B effectiveness of iron monitoring and treatment as well.  
 
Figure 2. Map grading the effectiveness of the monitoring/ treatment of iron overload across the globe 
 
Table 6. Availability and effectiveness of the monitoring for and treatment of iron overload 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Effectiveness 
Availability 
Effectiveness 
Availability 
Austria 
VH 
 
B 
Jordan 
H 
C 
A 
Bulgaria 
VH 
 
A 
Lebanon 
H 
B 
A 
Cyprus 
VH 
B 
A 
Tunisia 
H 
 
B 
France 
VH 
 
A 
Maldives 
H 
C 
B 
Germany 
VH 
 
A 
Sri Lanka 
H 
C 
B 
Greece 
VH 
B 
A 
Thailand 
H 
C 
A 
Israel 
VH 
 
A 
China 
H 
 
D 
Italy 
VH 
B 
A 
Taiwan, 
China 
VH 
C 
B 
Netherlands 
VH 
 
A 
Brazil 
H 
 
A 
Romania 
VH 
 
B 
Trinidad & 
Tobago 
H 
 
B 
Spain 
VH 
 
A 
Mauritius 
H 
 
C 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
153 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Country 
HDI 
Grading 
Effectiveness 
Availability 
Effectiveness 
Availability 
United 
Kingdom 
VH 
B 
A 
Algeria 
H 
 
D 
Sweden 
VH 
 
B 
South Africa 
M 
 
D 
Saudi Arabia 
VH 
 
A 
Viet Nam 
M 
 
D 
Kuwait 
VH 
 
B 
Philippines 
M 
 
C 
Oman 
VH 
 
A 
Lao 
M 
 
D 
Qatar 
VH 
 
A 
Cambodia 
M 
 
D 
United Arab 
Emirates 
VH 
B 
A 
Myanmar 
M 
 
D 
Australia 
VH 
 
A 
Nepal 
M 
 
D 
Brunei Dur 
VH 
 
B 
Indonesia 
M 
C 
C 
Malaysia 
VH 
C 
A 
India 
M 
C 
C 
Singapore 
VH 
B 
B 
Bangladesh 
M 
D 
D 
Canada 
VH 
 
A 
Sudan 
L 
 
D 
USA 
VH 
 
A 
Palestine 
L 
C 
C 
Albania 
H 
 
C 
Pakistan 
M 
C 
D 
Azerbaijan 
H 
 
C 
Morocco 
M 
C 
C 
Turkey 
H 
C 
A 
Egypt 
M 
C 
C 
Iran (Islamic 
Rep. of) 
H 
B 
B 
Afghanistan 
L 
 
D 
HDI: Human Development index; VH: very high; H: high; M: medium; L: low. SF: serum ferritin; LIC: Liver iron 
concentration. 
 
Patient Adherence 
Apart from non-availability of the means to control iron overload, poor adherence to treatment remains a major 
factor affecting iron related morbidity and mortality. Adherence is defined by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) as “the extent to which a person’s behaviour in taking medication, following a diet, and/or executing lifestyle 
changes, corresponds with agreed recommendations from a healthcare provider” [65]. 
There is no gold-standard method for measuring adherence and thus a variety of strategies have been reported 
[66, 67, 68]. In general, adherence is assessed using either a process-oriented or an outcome-oriented 
definition. In the process-oriented definition, patient behaviour is evaluated either by self-reporting [69] or by 
objective measures, such as pill counting. Patients are asked to rate their adherence behaviour either by asking 
direct questions or by using standardized patient questionnaires. Overall, the self-rating of adherence usually 
results in its overestimation. Some more objective approaches to assess adherence using the process-oriented 
definition include measuring the remaining dosage units during visits or using electronic monitoring devices 
(medication event monitoring systems) which record the date and time when a medication container is opened. 
In the outcome-oriented definition, an estimate of treatment outcome, usually a biochemical measurement 
(e.g. blood sugar or serum ferritin), is used to mirror the outcome of treatment. This approach may also be 
misleading as tests may be influenced by several additional factors such as diet, absorption or excretion rate, 
concomitant medications or interventions or comorbidities. In summary, measuring and reporting adherence 
levels is never an accurate process, but still, despite pitfalls, a necessary indicator of the results of iron overload 
management. 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
154 
Adherence to iron chelation therapy is of key importance to maintain iron balance and prevent iron 
accumulation in the liver, heart, and endocrine glands. Continuous protection from the toxic labile iron requires 
compliance with a regular iron chelation regimen and not intermittent high-dose chelation boosts. Lack of 
compliance is followed by higher rates of cardiac and endocrine complications, and lower overall survival as 
well as higher disease-related healthcare expenditure [70, 71]. 
In this report, TIF has relied on published information on patient adherence. The reported adherence to iron 
chelation therapy varies widely by time period, region and chelation regimen. A summary of the main 
publications is listed in Table 7. 
 
Table 7. Main studies reporting thalassaemia patients’ adherence to iron chelation therapy 
Study 
Year 
Country 
No. 
of 
Patients 
Method 
Drug 
Adherence 
Level 
 ARBORETTI R ET 
AL. EUR J CLIN 
PHARMACOL 
2001 
Italy 
867 
Interviews, 
self-reporting 
DFO 
 
AYDINOK Y ET 
AL. PAEDIATR 
INT 
2005 
Turkey 
38 
Self-reported 
DFO 
 
PAQBAZ Z ET AL. 
ANN NY ACAD 
SCI 
2005 
USA 
90 
Self-reported 
DFO 
 
TRACHTENBERG 
F ET AL. AM J 
HEMATOL 
2011 
USA, 
United 
Kingdom 
97 
Self-reported 
DFO/DFX 
 
PORTER J ET AL. 
ANEMIA 
2012 
Australia, 
Belgium, 
France, 
Germany, 
Greece, 
Italy, 
United 
Kingdom, 
Netherlands 
274 
SICT 
questionnaire 
Changing 
ICT 
to DFX 
DFX 
 
TRACHTENBERG 
F ET AL. QUAL 
LIFE RES 
2014 
USA, 
United 
Kingdom, 
Canada 
391 
Self-reported 
DFO/DFX/DFP 
 
HATZIPANDELIS 
ES ET AL. 
HEMOGLOBIN 
2014 
Greece 
36 
Self-reported 
Combination 
DFO/DFP 
 
AL-KOUB MI ET 
AL. PEDIATR 
HEMATOL 
ONCOL 
2014 
Jordan 
164 
(aged 12-
19) 
Interview 
DFX 
 
HAGHPANAH S. 
HEMATOL 
2014 
Iran 
220 
Self-reported 
DFO 114 pts 
DFX 106 pts 
 
VEKEMAN F ET 
AL. J MED ECON 
2016 
USA 
218 
(TM) 
Medication 
possession 
ratio (MPR) 
DFO/DFX/DFP 
 
ZEYDI AE ET AL. 
ELECTRON 
PHYSICIAN 
2017 
Iran 
18 
Semi-
structured 
interview 
All 3 chelators 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
155 
Study 
Year 
Country 
No. 
of 
Patients 
Method 
Drug 
Adherence 
Level 
TAHER A ET AL. 
AM J HEMATOL 
2017 
Lebanon, 
Greece, 
United 
Kingdom, 
etc. 
173 
Self-reported 
PROs 
DFX 
 
CHENG WY ET 
AL. CURR MED 
RES OPIN 
2018 
USA 
348 
(TM) 
Medication 
possession 
ration (MPR) 
DFX 
 
SIDHU S ET AL 
IJHOSCR 
2020 
India 
215 
(TM 
mean age 
15 years) 
Questionnaire, 
self-reported 
All 3 chelators 
 
THEPPORNPITAK 
K ET AL 
2021 
Thailand 
70 
MMAS-8 
All 3 chelators 
 
 
The reported results are variable and derived by different methodologies. However, they indicate a less than 
optimum usage of a treatment whose neglect may have serious long-term consequences. One aspect not often 
detected by studies, such as those exemplified above, is the fact that many patients experience periodic or 
episodic lapses in their adherence. This behaviour may be associated with situational psychological factors [86], 
but also other events such as travelling. These episodes will allow free iron to damage cells even though this 
may not be detected by simple monitoring with serum ferritin. 
 
Causes And Management of Non-Adherence 
The lack of adherence to therapy does not merely imply the failure of a patient to comply with the prescribed 
medications or to attend the scheduled visits or assessments. It is a rather complicated and multi-factorial issue; 
the causes of which may be related to the organization of healthcare provision, the knowledge and skills of 
treating physicians, the complexity and safety of therapeutic modalities and certainly the attitude of patients 
and their social environment towards their illness and its therapy. Table 6 summarizes the potential sources of 
non-adherence in patients with thalassaemia. 
An established and well-running national or regional thalassaemia management programme designed and 
implemented by the corresponding health authorities is of key importance. In this context, the allocation of 
sufficient healthcare resources, including the financial coverage of related therapies and the development of 
dedicated thalassaemia centres constitute strategic components of a successful thalassaemia management 
plan. 
The treating physicians and nurses play a crucial role for the adherence of patients to the indicated therapies. 
Two important barriers to patient adherence are the non-adherence of physicians to guideline 
recommendations and the failure to develop an adequate approach to patients and to establish a 
collaborative relationship with them. A common denominator for those barriers is often the lack of proper 
education and training of physicians on updated clinical practice guidelines and on a paternalistic approach to 
patients with chronic diseases. 
These elements of patient care, well organised services, financial support and, perhaps above all, the quality of 
the professional/patient relationship and psychosocial support, will result in patient satisfaction, which has 
been linked to adherence [87,88]. Therapeutic regimens are often difficult to adhere to, particularly in the case 
of composite multi-systemic diseases such as thalassaemia; and the lifelong duration of therapy, the possible 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
156 
side effects that may compromise the quality of life as well as the frequent hospital visits that interfere with the 
professional, and social life of patients constitute additional barriers to adherence [89]. 
Often patients do not have sufficient knowledge of their disease and its therapeutic requirements. Better 
disease knowledge has actually been shown to correlate positively with adherence to therapy by different 
studies [90] even though one study from Malaysia found no association between the adherence level and 
knowledge on thalassemia, while low family income was more likely to associated with poor adherence [91]. 
The issue of supervision and overall family support is also important, avoiding overprotectiveness. Social 
support is important; however, schoolteachers or work colleagues and supervisors are often unaware of 
patients’ condition and therefore unable to be supportive [92]. Furthermore, financial constraints may 
represent important barriers when full financial coverage of therapies and assessment is not provided by the 
healthcare system. Stigmatisation and social isolation may have significant adverse effects on patients’ 
compliance, while the presence of psychological distress or even illness may further be an important reason of 
non-adherence. The transition of care from one institution to another or from paediatric to adult care is often 
hurried and not well prepared and may lead to a violent disruption of the patient-physician relationship as the 
patient may feel uncomfortable in the new facility and may not trust the new medical personnel. Finally, cultural 
or religious issues may further intervene if not properly discussed and addressed by treating physicians. 
A strategy to improve adherence to therapy in TDT patients should first investigate all the aforementioned 
potential sources of barriers and then develop measures to address each one of them. Table 8 outlines a list of 
actions that may address the different sources of non-adherence in patients with TDT, along with the 
corresponding stakeholders that those actions should target. 
The provision of effective and safe pharmaceutical products is of utmost importance for patients’ 
compliance. This has become an issue in some countries where substandard generics are provided as a means 
to reduce costs, but with increased adverse effects. On the other hand, comparisons of adherence to different 
chelating agents in the course of clinical trials give higher than average adherence rates due to participants 
following a specific programme for a relatively short period of time. 
There are many interventions that may limit patient-related lack of compliance. The institution of simple things, 
such as alarms or reminder systems may address forgetfulness and negligence. Patients should be encouraged 
to express their concerns about therapy and participate in the scheduling of regimens visits and assessments 
to best fit their school, work, family, and social activities. Children and adolescents mainly, but also older and 
severely ill patients should be supervised and supported with as much discretion and expertise as possible by 
family members. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
157 
Table 8. Causes of non-adherence to therapy in patients with thalassaemia and suggested interventions to 
overcome them. 
Causes of non-adherence 
Stakeholders 
Suggested Interventions 
Healthcare-Related 
1. 
Lack of healthcare 
resources  
2. Lack or inadequate 
thalassaemia management 
programmes  
3. 
Lack of financial coverage  
4. Lack of specialized centres 
1. 
Healthcare authorities 
2. Patient and parent 
associations 
3. 
Pharmaceutical industry 
4. Academia 
5. International health 
organizations / bodies 
1. 
Development of 
national/regional 
thalassaemia 
management 
programmes 
2. Provision of financial 
coverage for disease-
related healthcare 
expenditures, reducing 
out-of-pocket expenses 
3. 
Development of 
dedicated centres for the 
management of patients 
with 
haemoglobinopathies (v. 
Reference Centres – for 
more information see 
relevant Chapter) 
4. Widespread use of 
effective and safe generic 
drugs 
PHYSICIAN-RELATED 
1. 
Non-adherence to 
clinical practice 
guideline 
recommendations / 
standards of care 
2. Inadequate approach to 
patients 
1. 
Treating physicians 
2. Health authorities  
3. 
Medical administration 
4. Medical associations 
5. Academia 
Education and training on current 
clinical practice recommendations  
Assessment and documentation 
of compliance with medical 
prescriptions and instructions 
Development of a relationship of 
mutual trust with patients ; an 
active role of the patient and 
a collaboration with the physician 
Understanding of patients’ 
concerns about therapy and 
response to them 
Arrangement of regimens and 
visits according to patients’ 
professional, family and lifestyle 
needs 
 
 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
158 
TREATMENT-RELATED 
• 
Complexity of regimens 
• 
Duration of regimens 
• 
Schedules contrasting 
patients’ lifestyle 
• 
Physical and emotional 
distress  
• 
Side effects 
• 
Drug regulatory 
authorities  
• 
Pharmaceutical industry 
• 
Healthcare authorities 
• 
Treating physicians 
• 
Improvement of drug 
safety  
• 
Improvement of delivery 
systems 
• 
Decrease complexity of 
regimens  
• 
Comprehensive 
education of patients on 
how to avoid treatment-
related distress and side 
effects 
• 
Limitation and effective 
management of side 
effects  
• 
Arrangement of regimens 
and visits to fit patients’ 
school, work, family, and 
social needs 
PATIENT-RELATED 
• 
Lack of understanding  
• 
Forgetfulness and 
negligence 
• 
Lack of supervision 
• 
Poor family and social 
support 
• 
Severity of medical 
condition 
• 
Financial issues 
• 
Stigma and social 
isolation 
• 
Psychiatric illness 
• 
Inappropriate transition 
of care  
• 
Cultural or religious 
issues 
• 
Patients 
• 
Parents and family 
• 
Treating physicians 
• 
School teachers 
• 
Social and community 
groups 
• 
Patient associations 
• 
Reminders and alarms, 
(e.g. through mobile apps 
such as TIF’s THALIA 
Mobile App)  
• 
Family supervision for 
children, adolescents, but 
also older and severely ill 
• 
Family education 
• 
Psychological support 
and therapy aiming for a 
self- motivated decision 
to adhere to the advice of 
the doctor. Cognitive 
behavioural therapies  
• 
Support by social workers  
• 
Engagement in sports, 
hobbies, and social 
activities  
• 
Well prepared transition 
of care 
 
Safety concerns, both acute and long-term, are important with iron chelating agents just as in any other 
medications. As the thalassaemia patient population ages more long-term effects are becoming apparent and 
physicians should be alert to the possibility and be ready find solutions for each affected individual. One major 
example is the effect on ocular function which seems to be more frequent with the long term use of 
desferrioxamine [93] [Nuzzi R, Geronazzo G, Tridico F, Nuzzi A, Caselgrandi P, Piga AG. Long-Term Effects of 
Iron Chelating Agents on Ocular Function in Patients with Thalassemia Major. Clin Ophthalmol. 2021 May 20; 
15:2099-2109. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S300974. PMID: 34045846]. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
159 
CONCLUSIONS 
The lack of adherence to therapy remains a significant unmet need in the management of patients with 
thalassaemia. It may substantially compromise the beneficial effects of modern therapy to patient prognosis 
and quality of life. It is a multi-factorial problem originating from several different sources, including issues 
related to healthcare system, treating physicians, therapeutic regimens, patients, family and social 
environment. The evaluation of patients’ compliance with the prescribed medications, scheduled visits and 
assessments should be part of regular process with relevant recording and investigation to improve adherence 
levels. All potential sources of non-adherence should be addressed by the involvement of healthcare 
authorities, academia, medical associations, treating physicians and other specialists, pharmaceutical industry, 
family, social groups, and patient associations. 
TIF has, for some time now, undertaken a series of initiatives to promote awareness on the importance of 
adherence of all stakeholders and interventions that may improve it. To this end, TIF acts in close collaboration 
with government officials, healthcare authorities and policymakers, medical associations, and healthcare 
professionals as well as thalassaemia patient and parent organizations. TIF works to form active, 
knowledgeable, and empowered thalassaemia patients who, with joint actions with relevant stakeholders, will 
promote the availability and effectiveness of iron load monitoring and iron chelation treatment effectiveness. 
Appropriate iron load management constitutes the second major pillar after blood transfusion therapy that 
contributes to the successful management of a multiorgan, chronic disease such as thalassaemia. It is clear from 
the compiled information and gross grading of the availability and effectiveness of iron load monitoring and 
treatment presented in this chapter (please see also maps A and B at the end of this chapter), that considerable 
works needs to be undertaken in the majority of the countries where this disorder is of medium to high 
prevalence.  Huge gaps and extensive heterogeneity are observed in this area within and across counties which 
underscores the huge inequalities across the world with regards to equal rights of patients for quality heath and 
other care. Through the sensitization and provision of reliable and patient-oriented information to healthcare 
authorities and planners, as part of their advocacy efforts, the patients and their families have a very crucial role 
to play. In addition, TIF also aims at the continuous improvement of the efficacy and safety of pharmaceutical 
products and devices associated with the care and treatment of thalassaemia in close collaboration with the 
WHO its patient associations members, the academia, the industry and national, regional and international 
medical, scientific and regulatory bodies. 
 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
160 
REFERENCES 
INTRODUCTION 
1. Garbowski MW, Cabantchik I, Hershko C, Hider R, 
Porter JB. The clinical relevance of detectable 
plasma iron species in iron overload states and 
subsequent to intravenous iron-carbohydrate 
administration. Am J Hematol. 2023 Mar;98(3):533-
540. doi: 10.1002/ajh.26819. 
2. Bou-Fakhredin R, Bazarbachi AH, Chaya B, 
Sleiman J, Cappellini MD, Taher AT. Iron Overload 
and 
Chelation 
Therapy 
in 
Non-Transfusion 
Dependent Thalassemia. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Dec 
20;18(12):2778. doi: 10.3390/ijms18122778.  
3. Paul A, Thomson VS, Refat M, Al-Rawahi B, Taher 
A, Nadar SK. Cardiac involvement in beta-
thalassaemia: 
current 
treatment 
strategies. 
Postgrad 
Med. 
2019; 
131(4):261-267. 
doi: 
10.1080/00325481.2019.1608071 
4. Farmakis D, Triposkiadis F, Lekakis J, Parissis J. 
Heart 
failure 
in 
haemoglobinopathies: 
pathophysiology, 
clinical 
phenotypes, 
and 
management. European Journal of Heart Failure 
(2017) 19, 479–489 doi:10.1002/ejhf.708 
5. Marsella M, Ricchi P. Thalassemia and 
hepatocellular carcinoma: links and risks. J Blood 
Med. 2019; 10:323-334. doi: 10.2147/JBM.S186362. 
eCollection 2019. 
6. Soliman AT, Yassin MA, De Sanctis V. Final adult 
height and endocrine complications in young 
adults with β-thalassemia major (TM) who received 
oral iron chelation (OIC) in comparison with those 
who did not use OIC. Acta Biomed. 2018; 89(2-
S):27-32. doi: 10.23750/abm.v89i2-S.7084. 
7. Karimi M, Zarei T, Haghpanah S, Azarkeivan A, 
Kattamis C et al. Evaluation of endocrine 
complications in beta-thalassemia intermedia (β-
TI): a cross-sectional multicenter study. Endocrine. 
2019. doi: 10.1007/s12020-019-02159-6. 
8. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Canatan D, Tzoulis P, 
Daar S, et al. n ICET-A survey on occult and 
emerging endocrine complications in patients with 
β-thalassemia 
major: 
Conclusions 
and 
recommendations. Acta Biomed. 2019; 89(4):481-
489. doi: 10.23750/abm.v89i4.7774. 
9. Porter J, author. Kattamis A, Cappellini MD, 
editors. Iron chelation. In: Cappellini MD, Farmakis 
D, Porter J, Taher A, editors. 2021 Guidelines: For 
the Management of Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassaemia (TDT) [Internet]. 4th ed. Nicosia 
(Cyprus): Thalassaemia International Federation; 
2023. CHAPTER 4. PMID: 38683929. 
10. Bayraktaroglu S, Karadas N, Onen S, Karapinar 
DY, Aydinok Y. Modern management of iron 
overload in thalassemia major patients guided by 
MRI techniques: real-world data from a long-term 
cohort study. Ann Hematol. 2022 Mar;101(3):521-
529. doi: 10.1007/s00277-021-04748-w. Erratum in: 
Ann Hematol. 2022 Jan 14. 
11. Vlachodimitropoulou E, Chen YL, Gar bowskia 
M, Koonyosyinga P, Psailac B, Sola-Visnerd M, 
Cooperc N, Hiderb R, Porter J. Eltrombopag: a 
powerful chelator of cellular or extracellular iron(III) 
alone or combined with a second chelator. Blood. 
2017;130(17):1923-1933. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-
10-740241. 
12. Punzo F, Tortora C, Argenziano M, Casale M, 
Perrotta S, Rossi F. Iron chelating properties of 
Eltrombopag: Investigating its role in thalassemia-
induced 
osteoporosis. 
PLoSOne. 
2018;13(12):e0208102.  
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0208102. 
eCollection 
2018. 
13. Khaled A, Salem HA, Ezzat DA, Seif HM, Rabee 
H. A randomized controlled trial evaluating the 
effects 
of 
amlodipine 
on 
myocardial 
iron 
deposition in pediatric patients with thalassemia 
major. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2019;13:2427-2436. 
doi: .2147/DDDT.S211630.eCollection 2019. 
14. Vlachou M, Kamperidis V, Giannakoulas G, 
Karamitsos T, Vlachaki E, Karvounis H. Biochemical 
and 
imaging 
markers 
in 
patients 
with 
thalassaemia. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2021 Jan-
Feb;62(1):4-12. doi: 10.1016/j.hjc.2020.04.012. 
15. Hisam A, Sadiq Khan N, Tariq NA, Irfan H, Arif B, 
Noor M. Perceived stress and monetary burden 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
161 
among thalassaemia patients and their caregivers. 
Pak J Med Sci. 2018; 34(4): 901-6  
16. Budych K, Helms TM, Schultz C. How do 
patients with rare diseases experience the medical 
encounter? Exploring role behaviour and the 
impact on patient physician interaction. Health 
Policy. 2012; 105(2-3): 154-164. 
17. Fortin PM, Fisher SA, Madgwick KV, Trivella M, 
Hopewell S, Doree C, Estcourt LJ. Strategies to 
increase adherence to iron chelation therapy in 
people with sickle cell disease or thalassaemia.  
Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2018; 
doi: 
10.1002/14651858. CD0123449.pub2 
18. Telfer P, Coen PG, Christou S, Hadjigavriel M, 
Kolnakou A, Pangalou E, Pavlides N, Psiloines M, 
Simamonian K, Skordos G, Sitarou M, Angastiniotis 
M. Survival of medically treated thalassemia 
patients in Cyprus. Trends and risk factors over the 
period 
1980-2004. 
Haematologica. 
2006 
Sep;91(9):1187-92. 
19. Pinto VM, Poggi M, Russo R, Giusti A, Forni GL. 
Management of the aging beta-thalassemia 
transfusion-dependent population - The Italian 
experience. Blood Rev. 2019 Nov;38:100594. doi: 
10.1016/j.blre.2019.100594. 
COUNTRY REFERENCES 
20. Austria – delegation visit (dv) 2019 
21. Georgiev PG, Sapunarova KG, Goranova-
Marinova VS, Goranov SE. Reduction of Liver Iron 
Load in Adult Patients with β-Thalassemia Major 
Treated with Modern Chelation Modalities. Folia 
Med (Plovdiv). 2020 Jun 30;62(2):265-270. doi: 
10.3897/folmed.62.e39518. 
22. Angastiniotis M, Christou S, Kolnakou A, 
Pangalou E, Savvidou I, Farmakis D, Eleftheriou A. 
The Outcomes of Patients with Haemoglobin 
Disorders in Cyprus: A Joined Report of the 
Thalassaemia International Federation and the 
Nicosia and Paphos Thalassaemia Centres (State 
Health 
Services 
Organisation). 
Thalassemia 
Reports. 
2022; 
12(4):143-156. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/thalassrep12040019 
23. Thuret I, Pondarré C, Loundou A, Steschenko D, 
Girot R, Bachir D, Rose C et al. Complications and 
treatment of patients with β-thalassemia in 
France: 
results 
of 
the 
National 
Registry. 
Haematologica. 
2010; 
95(5):724-9. 
doi: 
10.3324/haematol.2009.018051 
24. de Montalembert M, Ribeil JA, Brousse V, 
Guerci-Bresler A et al. Cardiac iron overload in 
chronically transfused patients with thalassemia, 
sickle cell anemia, or myelodysplastic syndrome. 
PLoS 
One. 
2017; 
12(3):e0172147. 
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0172147.eCollection 2017 
25. Agouti I, Thuret I, Bernit E , Galacteros F, 
Steschenko F et al. Data from the French registry 
for beta-thalassemia patients. EHA Learning 
Center. Badens C. 2019; 266587 
26. Voskaridou E, Kattamis A, Fragodimitri C, 
Kourakli A, Chalkia P et al. National registry of 
hemoglobinopathies 
in 
Greece: 
updated 
demographics, current trends in affected births, 
and causes of mortality. Ann Hematol. 2019 
Jan;98(1):55-66. doi: 10.1007/s00277-018-3493-4 
27. Kattamis A, Mikelatou A, Koumasi K, Nitsa E , 
Rigatou E, Kyriakopoulou D. 8-years' overall and 
event free survival is suboptimal in a large group of 
transfusion-dependent thalassemic patients. EHA 
Learning Center. KATTAMIS A, 2019; 266588 
28. Shargian-Alon L, Pasvolsky O, Raanani P. 
Thalassemia Major and Intermedia in Patients 
Older than 35 Years: A Single Center Experience. Isr 
Med Assoc J, 2017; 19: 767–771 
29. Piga A, Longo F, Musallam KM, Cappellini MD, 
Forni GL et al. Assessment and management of 
iron overload in thalassaemia major patients 
during the 21st century: a real-life experience from 
the Italian Webthal project. Br J Haematol, 2013, 
161, 872–883 
30. Musallam KM, Barella S, Origa R, Ferrero GB, 
Lisi R, Pasanisi A, Longo F, Gianesin B, Forni GL; 
Webthal® project. Differential effects of iron 
chelators on iron burden and long-term morbidity 
and mortality outcomes in a large cohort of 
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassemia 
patients 
who remained on the same monotherapy over 10 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
162 
years. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2024 Jul;107:102859. 
doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2024.102859. 
31. Romania delegation visit report 2016 
32. 
Bardón-Cancho 
EJ, 
Marco-Sánchez JM, 
Benéitez-Pastor D, Payán-Pernía S, Llobet AR, 
Berrueco R, García-Morin M, Beléndez C, Senent L, 
Acosta MJO, Pleguezuelos IP, Velasco P, Collado A, 
Moreno-Carbonell M, Argilés B, de Soto IP, Del Mar 
Bermúdez M, Salido Fiérrez EJ, Blanco-Álvarez A, 
Navarro 
PG, Cela 
E. 
Spanish 
registry 
of 
hemoglobinopathies and rare anemias (REHem-
AR): 
demographics, 
complications, 
and 
management of patients with β-thalassemia. Ann 
Hematol. 
2024 
May;103(5):1525-1539. 
doi: 
10.1007/s00277-024-05694-z. Epub 2024 Mar 23. 
Erratum in: Ann Hematol. 2024 Aug;103(8):3283-
3284. doi: 10.1007/s00277-024-05838-1. 
33. Shah F, Telfer P, Velangi M, Pancham S, Wynn R, 
Pollard S, Chalmers E, Kell J, Carter AM, Hickey J, 
Paramore C, Jobanputra M, Ryan K. Routine 
management, healthcare resource use and patient 
and carer-reported outcomes of patients with 
transfusion-dependent β-thalassaemia in the 
United Kingdom: A mixed methods observational 
study. EJHaem. 2021 Sep 8;2(4):738-749. doi: 
10.1002/jha2.282.  
34. Kurban LA, Almarri BK, Alshamsi MH, 
Abdelrahman SS, Alwahshi SG, Alhorani Q, Syed R, 
Bakoush O. Optimized serum ferritin prediction of 
iron 
overload 
in 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia: likelihood ratio and age-adjustment 
approach. Ann Saudi Med. 2023 Mar-Apr;43(2):90-
96. doi: 10.5144/0256-4947.2023.90.  
35. Daar S, Al-Naamani K, De Sanctis V, Al Rahbi S, 
Al Zadjali S, Khan H, Panjwani V, Al-Khabori M. 
Mortality and complications in Omani patients with 
beta-thalassemia major: a long-term follow-up 
study. Acta Biomed. 2023 Aug 3;94(4):e2023191. 
doi: 10.23750/abm.v94i5.14856.  
36. Kanbour I, Chandra P, Soliman A, De Sanctis V, 
Nashwan A, Abusamaan A, Moustafa A Yassin MA. 
Severe Liver Iron Concentrations (LIC) in 24 
Patients with β-Thalassemia Major: Correlations 
with Serum Ferritin, Liver Enzymes and Endocrine 
Complications. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis 2018; 
10; e2018062  
37. Almahmoud R, Hussein A, Khaja FA, Soliman 
AF, Dewedar H, Shareef ZA, Mathai S. Growth and 
endocrinopathies 
among 
children 
with 
β-
Thalassemia major treated at Dubai Thalassemia 
centre. BMC Pediatr. 2024 Apr 5;24(1):244. doi: 
10.1186/s12887-024-04670-w. 
38. Ho PJ, Hiwase D, Ramakrishna R, Viiala N, 
Solterbeck A, Traficante R, Zor E et al. Cardiac and 
hepatic siderosis in myelodysplastic syndrome, 
thalassemia and diverse causes of transfusion-
dependent 
anemia: 
the 
TIMES 
study. 
HemaSphere, 
2019;00:00. 
http://dx. 
doi: 
10.1097/HS9.0000000000000224 
39. Chow LC, Lee BS, Tang SO, Loh EW, Ng SC, Tan 
XY, Ahmad Noordin MN, Ong GB, Chew LC. Iron 
burden 
and 
endocrine 
complications 
in 
transfusion-dependent thalassemia patients In 
Sarawak, Malaysia: a retrospective study. Med J 
Malaysia. 2024 May;79(3):281-287. 
40. Lam JCM, Lee SY, Koh PL, Fong SZ, Abdul-
Kadir NI, Lim CY, Zhang X, Bhattacharyya R, Soh 
SY, Chan MY, Tan AM, Kuperan P, Ang AL. Clinical 
and health-related quality of life outcomes of 
transfusion-dependent thalassaemia patients in 
Singapore. 
Blood 
Cells 
Mol 
Dis. 
2021 
May;88:102547. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2021.102547 
41. Chapin J, Cohen AR, Neufeld EJ, Vichinsky E, 
Giardina PJ, Boudreaux J, Le BC, Kenney K, Trimble 
S, Thompson AA. An update on the US adult 
thalassaemia population: a report from the CDC 
thalassaemia treatment centres. Br J Haematol. 
2022 Jan;196(2):380-389. doi: 10.1111/bjh.17920. 
42. Bayraktaroglu S, Karadas N, Onen S, Karapinar 
DY, Aydinok Y. Modern management of iron 
overload in thalassemia major patients guided by 
MRI techniques: real-world data from a long-term 
cohort study. Ann Hematol. 2022 Mar;101(3):521-
529. doi: 10.1007/s00277-021-04748-w. Epub 2022 
Jan 
5. 
Erratum 
in: 
Ann 
Hematol. 
2022 
Mar;101(3):531. doi: 10.1007/s00277-022-04755-5. 
43. Kosaryan M, KaramI H, Darvishi-KhezrI H, 
Akbarzadeh R, Aliasgharian A, Bromand K. 
Treatment Status of Patients with Β-Thalassemia 
Major in Northern Iran: Thalassemia Registry 
System. Iran J Public Health. 2019, 48(7), 1335-1345 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
163 
44. Dhouib N.G., Khaled M.B., Ouederni M., Besbes 
H., Kouki R., Mellouli F., Bejaoui M. Growth and 
endocrine function in Tunisian thalassemia major 
patients. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis 2018, 10(1): 
e2018031, 
doi: 
ttp://dx.doi.org/10.4084/MJHID.2018.031 
45. Premawardhana AP, Mudiyanse R, De Silva ST, 
Jiffry N, Nelumdeniya U, de Silva U, et al. A 
nationwide survey of hospital-based thalassemia 
patients and standards of care and a preliminary 
assessment of the national prevention program in 
Sri Lanka. PLoS ONE 2019. 14(8): e0220852. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0220852 
46. Mettananda S, Pathiraja H, Peiris R, Bandara D, 
de Silva U, Mettananda C, Premawardhena A. 
Health related quality of life among children with 
transfusion dependent β-thalassaemia major and 
haemoglobin E β-thalassaemia in Sri Lanka: a case 
control study. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes. 
(2019) 17:137  
47. Chuncharunee S, Teawtrakul N, Siritanaratkul 
N, Chueamuangphan N. Review of disease-related 
complications and management in adult patients 
with thalassemia: A multi-center study in Thailand. 
PLoS One. 2019 Mar 20;14(3):e0214148. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0214148.eCollection 2019. 
48. Huang Y, Yang G, Wang M, Wei X, Pan L, Liu J, 
Lei Y, Peng, Long L, Lai Y, Liu R. Iron overload status 
in 
patients 
with 
non-transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia in China. Ther Adv Hematol. 2022 Mar 
18;13:20406207221084639. 
doi: 
10.1177/20406207221084639. 
49. Wang M, Liu R, Liang Y, Yang G, Huang Y, Yu C, 
Sun K, Lai Y, Xia Y. Iron overload correlates with 
serum liver fibrotic markers and liver dysfunction: 
Potential new methods to predict iron overload-
related liver fibrosis in thalassemia patients. United 
European Gastroenterol J. 2017 Feb;5(1):94-103. 
doi: 10.1177/2050640616646525 
50. Wu HP, Lin CL, Chang YC, Wu KH, Lei RL, Peng 
CT, Weng T, Tai YM, Chao YH. Survival and 
complication rates in patients with thalassemia 
major in Taiwan. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2017; 
64(1):135-138. doi: 10.1002/pbc.26181. 
51. Chapchap EC, Silva MMA, de Assis RA, Kerbauy 
LN, Diniz MDS, Rosemberg LA, Loggetto SR, 
Araujo ADS, Fabron Junior A, Verissimo MPA, 
Baldanzi GR, Esposito BP, Tricta F, Steagall MEA, 
Vellozo 
CÂGDS, 
Fertrin 
KY, 
Baroni 
RH, 
Hamerschlak N. Cardiac iron overload evaluation in 
thalassaemic 
patients 
using 
T2* 
magnetic 
resonance imaging following chelation therapy: a 
multicentre 
cross-sectional 
study. 
Hematol 
Transfus Cell Ther. 2023 Jan-Mar;45(1):7-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.htct.2021.01.014. 
52. Tiwari D, Gupta SK, Thapa NB, Devkota K. High 
Serum Ferritin Levels among Blood Transfused 
Thalassemic Patients Admitted to the Department 
of Paediatrics in a Tertiary Care Centre: A 
Descriptive Cross-Sectional Study. JNMA J Nepal 
Med Assoc. 2023 Jun 1;61(262):543-545. doi: 
10.31729/jnma.8195 
53. Wahidiyat PA, Iskandar SD, Sekarsari D. 
Evaluation of Iron Overload Between Age Groups 
Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Its 
Correlation with Iron Profile in Transfusion-
dependent Thalassemia. Acta Med Indones. 2018 
Jul;50(3):230-236. 
54. Fianza PI, Rahmawati A, Widihastha SH, Afifah 
S, Ghozali M, Indrajaya A, Pratama DMA, Prasetya 
D, Sihite TA, Syamsunarno MRAA, Setiabudi D, 
Fucharoen S, Panigoro R. Iron Overload in 
Transfusion-Dependent Indonesian Thalassemic 
Patients. Anemia. 2021 Apr 15;2021:5581831. doi: 
10.1155/2021/5581831. 
55. Jayashree Satish Rao, Nagendra K. A study 
conducted in a tertiary care hospital to assess the 
cardiac function in paediatric beta thalassemia 
major patients and correlation with serum ferritin 
levels which are indicative of chelation status of the 
patients. Indian Journal of Child Health. 2023. 
10(6):73-76 DOI:10.32677/ijch.v10i6.4040 
56. Rabadiya SM, Yogesh M, Nagda J, Gandhi R, 
Makwana N. Association of serum ferritin trends 
with liver enzyme patterns in β-thalassemia major: 
A longitudinal correlational study. J Family Med 
Prim 
Care. 
2024 
Jul;13(7):2698-2702. 
doi: 
10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_1897_23. 
57. Chowdhury R, Iktidar MA, Ahmed MN, Hasan 
MM, Tapan MMH, Shaheen SSI, Rahman A, Khatun 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
164 
A. Prevalence of hypogonadism in transfusion-
dependent β-thalassemia patients of Bangladesh: 
investigating the role of serum ferritin level as a 
diagnostic tool. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2023 
Jul-Sep;45(3):350-357. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.htct.2022.06.010. 
58. Ayyash H, Sirdah M. Hematological and 
biochemical evaluation of β-thalassemia major 
(βTM) patients in Gaza Strip: A cross-sectional 
study. Int J Health Sci (Qassim). 2018 Nov-
Dec;12(6):18-24. 
59. Aldwaik R, Abu Mohor T, Idyabi I, Warasna S, 
Abdeen S, Karmi B, Abu Seir R. Health Status of 
Patients With β-Thalassemia in the West Bank: A 
Retrospective-Cohort 
Study. 
Front 
Med 
(Lausanne). 
2021 
Dec 
20;8:788758. 
doi: 
10.3389/fmed.2021.788758. 
60. Hussain S, Hoodbhoy Z, Ali F, Hasan E, Alvi N, 
Hussain A, Ishrat K, Ur Rahman Z, Qamruddin A, 
Parvin A, Hasan BS. Reduction of cardiac iron 
overload by optimising iron chelation therapy in 
transfusion dependent thalassaemia using cardiac 
T2* MRI: a quality improvement project from 
Pakistan. Arch Dis Child. 2020 Nov;105(11):1041-
1048. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-319203. 
61. Suhaib A, Wazir ZJ, Qayyum IA. Clinical and 
Haematological 
Picture 
of 
Multi-Transfused 
Thalassaemia Major Patients at a Center in 
Pakistan. JIIMC 2018 13(2): 52-56 
62. Agouzal M, Arfaoui A, Quyou A, Khattab M. 
Beta thalassemia major: The Moroccan experience. 
Journal of Public Health and Epidemiology Vol. 
2(2), pp. 25-28. 
63. Khaled A, Ezzat DA, Salem HA, Seif HM, Rabee 
H. Effective method of evaluating myocardial iron 
concentration 
in 
pediatric 
patients 
with 
thalassemia major. J Blood Med. 2019 Jul 
12;10:227-233. doi: 10.2147/JBM.S204848.  
64. Hassan T, Zakaria M, Fathy M, Arafa M, El 
Gebaly S, Emam A, et al. Association between 
genotype and disease complications in Egyptian 
patients with beta thalassemia: A Cross-sectional 
study. 
Sci 
Rep. 
2018; 
8(1):17730. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41598-018-36175-9. 
ADHERENCE 
REFERENCES 
65. Sabate E. WHO Adherence Meeting Report. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001. 
66. Monnette A, Zhang Y, Shao H, Shi L. 
Concordance of Adherence Measurement Using 
Self-Reported Adherence Questionnaires and 
Medication Monitoring Devices: An Updated 
Review. 
Review 
Pharmacoeconomics, 
2018; 
36(1):17-27. DOI: 10.1007/s40273-017-0570-9 
67. Forbes, C. A., Deshpande, S., Sorio-Vilela, F., 
Kutikova, L., Duffy, S., Gouni-Berthold, I., & 
Hagström, E. (2018). A systematic literature review 
comparing methods for the measurement of 
patient persistence and adherence. Current 
Medical Research and Opinion, 34(9), 1613–1625. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2018.1477747 
68. Locke M, Reddy PS, Badawy SM. Adherence to 
Iron Chelation Therapy among Adults with 
Thalassemia: A Systematic Review. Hemoglobin. 
2022 
Jul;46(4):201-213. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2022.2072320 
69. Naqvi, A. A., & Hassali, M. A. Limitations in 
contemporary self-reported medication adherence 
questionnaires: the concept and design of the 
General Medication Adherence Scale (GMAS) 
originating from a developing country. Current 
Medical Research and Opinion, 2018. 35(1), 1–2. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2018.1526169 
70. Saliba AN, El Rassi F, Taher AT. Clinical 
monitoring and management of complications 
related to chelation therapy in patients with β-
thalassemia. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016;9(2):151-
68. doi: 10.1586/17474086.2016.1126176. 
71. 
Vekeman 
F, 
Sasane 
M, 
Cheng 
WY, 
Ramanakumar AV, Fortier J, Qiu Y, Duh MS, Paley 
C, Adams-Graves P. Adherence to iron chelation 
therapy and associated healthcare resource 
utilization and costs in Medicaid patients with 
sickle cell disease and thalassemia. J Med Econ. 
2016; 
19(3): 
292-303. 
Doi:10.3111/13696998.2015.1117979  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
165 
72. Arboretti R, Tognoni G, Alberti D, Italian 
Collaborative 
Group 
on 
thalassaemia. 
Pharmacosurveillance and quality of care of 
thalassaemic 
patients. 
A 
large 
scale 
epidemiological survey. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2001; 
56(12): 915-22 doi: 10.1007/s002280000251 
73. Aydinok Y, Erermis S, Bukusoglu N, Yilmaz D, 
Solak U. Psychosocial implications of Thalassemia 
Major. Pediatr. Int.  2005 doi.org/10.1111/j.1442-
200x.2004.02009.x 
74. Pakbaz Z, Fischer R, Treadwell M, Yamashita R, 
Fung EB, Calvelli L, Quirolo K, Foote D, Harmatz P, 
Vichinsky EP. A Simple Model to Assess and 
Improve Adherence to Iron Chelation Therapy with 
Deferoxamine in Patients with Thalassemia. Ann 
N.Y. 
Acad 
Sci. 
2005; 
1054: 
486-491. 
doi.org/10.1196/annals.1345.065 
75. Trachtenberg F, Vichinsky E, Haines D, Pakbaz 
Z, Mednick L, Sobota A, et al. Iron chelation 
adherence to deferoxamine and deferasirox in 
thalassemia. Am J Hematol. 2011; 86(5): 433-6. Doi: 
10.1002/ajh.21993 
76. Porter J, Bowden DK, Economou M, Troncy J, 
Ganser A, et al. Health-related quality of life, 
treatment satisfaction, adherence and persistence 
in b-thalassemia and myelodysplastic syndrome 
patients with iron overload receiving deferasirox: 
results from the EPIC clinical trial. Anemia. 2012; 
doi:10.1155/2012/297641. 
77. Trachtenberg FL, Gerstenberger E, Xu Y, 
Mednick L, Sobota A, Ware H, Thompson AA, 
Neufeld EJ, Yamashita R. Relationship among 
chelator adherence, change in chelators and 
quality of life in thalassemia.  Quality of Life 
Research. 
2014; 
23: 
2277–2288. 
doi.org/10.1007/s11136-014-0671-2 
78. Hatzipantelis ES, Karasmanis K, Petrifanis V, 
Vlachaki E, Tziomalos K, Economou M. Combined 
chelation 
therapy 
with 
deferoxamine 
and 
deferiprone in b-thalassemia major: compliance 
and opinions of young thalassemic patients.  
Hemoglobin. 
2014; 
38(2): 
111-4. 
Doi: 
10.3109/03630269.2013.867407  
79. Al-Khoub MI, Abed MA, Al-Khawaldeh OA, Al 
Tawarah YM, Sivarajan Froelicher E. Predictors of 
non-adherence to follow-up visits and deferasirox 
chelation therapy amongJordanian adolescents 
with thalassaemia major. Paeditr Hematol Oncol. 
2014; 
31(7): 
624-37. 
Doi.org/10.3109/08880018.2014.939792 
80. Haghpanah S, Zarei T, Zahedi Z, Karimi M. 
Compliance 
and 
satisfactionwith 
deferasirox 
(Exjade) compared with deferoxamine in patients 
with 
transfusion 
dependent 
thalassemia. 
Hematology. 
2014; 
19(4): 
187-91. 
Doi: 
10.1179/1607845413Y.0000000121 
81. Zeydi AE, Moonaghi HK, Heydari A. Exploring 
Iranian b-thalassemia major patients’ perception of 
barriers and facilitators of adherence to treatment: 
a qualitative study. Electronic Physician. 2017; 
9(12): 6102-10. Doi.org/10.19082/6102   
82. Taher A. Origa R, Perrotta S, Kourakli A, Ruffo 
GB, Kattamis A et al. New film coated tablet 
formulation of deferasirox is well tolerated in 
patients with thalassemia or lower risk MDS: 
Results of the randomised, phase II ECLIPSE study. 
Am 
J 
Hematol. 
2017; 
92(5): 
420-28 
doi: 
10.1002/ajh.24668 
83. Cheng WY, Said Q, Hao Y, Xiao Y, Vekeman F, 
Bobbil P, Duh MS, Nandal S, Blinder M. Adherence 
to iron chelation therapy in patients who switched 
from deferasirox dispersable tablets to film-coated 
tablets. Curr Med Res Opin. 2018; 34(11): 1959-66. 
Doi: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1470500 
84. Sidhu S, Kakkar S, Dewan P, Bansal N, Sobti PC. 
Adherence to Iron Chelation Therapy and Its 
Determinants. Int J Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Res. 
2021 
Jan 
1;15(1):27-34. 
doi: 
10.18502/ijhoscr.v15i1.5247. PMID: 33613898 
85. 
Theppornpitak 
K, 
Trakarnsanga 
B, 
Lauhasurayotin S, Poparn H, Chiengthong K, 
Sosothikul D, Techavichit P. A Study to Assess and 
Improve Adherence to Iron Chelation Therapy in 
Transfusion-Dependent 
Thalassemia 
Patients. 
Hemoglobin. 
2021 
May;45(3):171-174. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.1934010. PMID: 34102943. 
86. Vosper J, Evangeli M, Porter JB, Shah F. 
Psychological factors associated with episodic 
chelation adherence in thalassemia. Hemoglobin. 
IRON OVERLOAD IN THALASSAEMIA: ITS MONITORING AND TREATMENT 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
166 
2018; 
42(1), 
30-36. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2018.1433686. 
87. Geneen LJ, Dorée C, Estcourt LJ. Interventions 
for improving adherence to iron chelation therapy 
in people with sickle cell disease or thalassaemia. 
Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2023 
Mar 
6;3(3):CD012349. 
doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD012349.pub3 
88. Eziefula C, Shah FT, Anie KA. Promoting 
Adherence to Iron Chelation Treatment in Beta-
Thalassemia Patients. Patient Prefer Adherence. 
2022 
Jun 
7;16:1423-1437. 
doi: 
10.2147/PPA.S269352. 
89. Locke M, Reddy PS, Badawy SM. Adherence to 
Iron Chelation Therapy among Adults with 
Thalassemia: A Systematic Review. Hemoglobin. 
2022 
Jul;46(4):201-213. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2022.2072320. 
90. Keowmani T, Teo SC, Yap KC, Chua WL, Mohd 
Tahir NF, Chua PW, Lim VC, Leong HH. Adherence 
to Iron Chelation Therapy Among Children with 
Beta Thalassemia Major: A Multicenter Cross-
Sectional Study. Hemoglobin. 2023 Nov;47(6):237-
244. doi: 10.1080/03630269.2023.2295291. 
91. Mohamed R, Abdul Rahman AH, Masra F and 
Abdul Latiff Z. Barriers to adherence to iron 
chelation 
therapy 
among 
adolescent 
with 
transfusion dependent thalassemia. 2022. Front. 
Pediatr. 10:951947.doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.951947 
92. Chong CC, Redzuan AM, Sathar J, Makmor-
Bakry M. Patient Perspective on Iron Chelation 
Therapy: Barriers and Facilitators of Medication 
Adherence. 
J 
Patient 
Exp. 
2021 
Mar 
3;8:2374373521996958. 
doi: 
10.1177/2374373521996958. 
93. Nuzzi R, Geronazzo G, Tridico F, Nuzzi A, 
Caselgrandi P, Piga AG. Long-Term Effects of Iron 
Chelating Agents on Ocular Function in Patients 
with Thalassemia Major. Clin Ophthalmol. 2021 
May 
20;15:2099-2109. 
doi: 
10.2147/OPTH.S300974. 
94. Forni GL, Kattamis A, Kuo KHM, Maggio A, 
Sheth S, Taher AT, Viprakasit V. Iron chelation 
therapy for children with transfusion-dependent β-
thalassemia: How young is too young? Pediatr 
Blood 
Cancer. 
2024 
Aug;71(8):e31035. 
doi: 
10.1002/pbc.31035. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
167 
 
 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
168 
6. GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR 
THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., Eleftheriou A., & Farmakis D. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Measuring Iron Load In Vital Organs – The Role of Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been widely adopted for iron quantification in vital organs, mainly the 
heart and the liver. In addition to assessing the distribution and grading of iron overload, this method offers the 
possibility to monitor treatment response and thus guide effectively iron chelation therapy. It was soon 
recognised as superior to biochemical methods of measuring iron overload and mainly serum ferritin, since 
these can be influenced by factors such as inflammation and infection and cannot be used a surrogates of 
cardiac iron content. 
 
Likewise, measuring liver iron became important. The liver is the main iron storage organ (in hepatocytes and 
Kupffer cells) and the first to show iron overload. Importantly, it also has a linear relationship with total body 
iron [11]. Biopsy of liver was used by many centres, but sampling variability, small size of specimens, and the 
invasiveness of biopsy led to its replacement by non-invasive MRI methods [8, 9, 10]. Early detection of iron 
overload in the liver is important since it may lead to liver fibrosis, organ failure, cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma. This imaging technique, beyond just measurements of iron load, also provides the imaging of liver 
pathology such as detecting liver nodules and fibrotic changes. Overall, MRI imaging and measuring iron load 
provides the opportunity for timely interventions, such as iron chelation intensification and follow-up of 
chelation therapy thus allowing for treatment fine tuning. 
Practical implementation in clinical practice has demonstrated that the quality of images, and the accuracy and 
reproducibility of measurements varies considerably, and experts have recommended a number of steps to 
ensure accurate assessment of measurements, especially where hepatic iron is concerned (Figure 1). 
 
The measurement of iron in the heart by MRI was the first to be implemented. This was in response to the 
high mortality caused by iron overload cardiomyopathy, which results in heart failure and arrhythmias. 
This was the cause of both long-term morbidity and death, even in centres which offered ‘adequate’ iron 
chelation, and was identified as the cause of death in over 70% [1,2,3] of thalassaemia patients. It was also 
recognised that this form of cardiomyopathy is reversible when intensive iron chelation was initiated early 
[4]. This led to the need for early detection of iron accumulation in the heart, before heart failure is 
established. Direct measurement of myocardial iron was required, and the MRI technology was developed 
and rapidly adopted [5]. The impact on survival of early intervention by intensification of iron chelation, 
was soon evident [6,7] in centres where this measurement was implemented, and TIF Guidelines included 
the recommendation that periodic testing should be routine. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
169 
 
Figure 1. Four key steps for a MRI-based liver iron concentration measurement method. Borrowed from Quinn CT, 
St Pierre TG. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2016; 63:773–780 [21] 
 
It is essential that data acquisition, data analysis, and validation procedures match exactly to those used in the 
calibration study. Even small deviations from protocols will cause calibration shifts and hence inaccurate 
measurements. The importance of image quality is emphasised in a study from Sweden, in which it is concluded 
that assessing iron overload can be performed in a non-dedicated centre with sufficient image quality [12]; the 
study recognised that T2* assessment needs to be repeatable, and the normal range of myocardial and liver 
T2*-values needs to be known in relation to the limits used in monitoring the chelation therapy, especially, 
since non-specialized centres may perform only a few clinical iron overload MRI each year. The study evaluated 
the image quality of T2* parametric maps of the heart and liver 
 
Liver MRI 
Several MR imaging techniques have been developed for liver iron quantification, each with advantages and 
limitations [13, 14]: 
• 
R2 RELAXOMETRY: R2 relaxometry [10] is validated but is prone to respiratory motion artefacts due 
to a long acquisition time. This is the validated method marketed by Resonance Health as Ferriscan®, 
now with a new version called FeriSmart®, which uses artificial intelligence (AI) to replace the first 
version that required direct communication with the company and cost and time to report results. The 
AI version has been through trials and has gained FDA approval. It is now cheaper since it saves on staff 
time and is easier to use. FerriSmart®, according to a recent company statement, “provides an 
accurate, validated and standardised MRI-based measurement of liver iron concentration (LIC). 
FerriSmart delivers fast, accurate results, unaffected by inflammation, fibrosis and cirrhosis, and 
returns standardized results directly to clinicians and radiologists in seconds. The FerriSmart neural 
network was trained using Resonance Health’s proprietary FerriScan technology and delivers state of 
the art liver iron concentration quantification”.  
Data 
Acquisition 
Data  
Analysis 
Calibration 
Validation 
Procedures 
•
A series of images are acquired with 
very specific scanner settings 
•
Digital images are analysed with specific algorithms and 
mathematical models 
•
Generates R2, R2*, T2, T2*, or SIR 
•
Mathematical equation derived from 
experimental study 
•
Related R2, R2*, T2, T2*, or SIR to 
tissue iron concentration 
•
Routine checks 
against 
standards 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
170 
• 
R2* TECHNIQUE: The R2* technique has fast acquisition time, using single or multiple breath holds 
and allows a wide range of liver iron content, but requires additional post-processing software which 
must be purchased, while some centres are using their own ‘house made’ sequence. R2* allows 3D 
imaging. For liver iron, T2* calibrations have been developed by J Wood et al [15] and Gabrowski MW 
et al [16]. During the discussions held during the International Conference on Thalassaemia in 
Thessaloniki in 2017, it was acknowledged that using T2* for liver iron, when well done and in well 
controlled conditions, is an “excellent tool”.  
• 
SIGNAL INTENSITY RATIO (SIR): SIR is the simplest method, measuring the ratio of signal intensity 
between the liver and skeletal muscles. The method is accessible since it can be used on any machine 
and with different magnetic strengths. It is not accurate in severe iron load since upper limit is 21mg 
Fe/g dry weight. However, SIR is being used in clinical settings and recently a study showed that the 
method is feasible also using 3T scanners [17]. 
The R2 technique is used mainly by Resonance Health, which is the only FDA/EMA approved and commercially 
available method. It is calibrated and validated for standard liver iron measurements on many scanners. At 
present, however, the R2* technique is the one used in most centres across the world. An example of the 
usefulness of measuring LIC is to follow progress over time and the effect of iron chelation regimes. One such 
study from Plovdiv, Bulgaria, indicated that patients who had normal liver MRI T2*, increased from 2011 to 
1014, due to appropriate iron chelation [18]. 
Imaging and biochemical markers of liver iron toxicity should be used together with MRI for a complete clinical 
assessment. For example, Transient Liver Elastography, used to measure liver fibrosis is a non-invasive method 
and correlates well with the degree of fibrosis. In a study from Indonesia, based on MRI T2* examination of the 
liver, all subjects experienced liver toxicity; 48.9% of the subjects, receiving blood transfusions on a regular basis 
and aged over 18 years (42% 18-30 years), experienced severe liver haemosiderosis with liver fibrosis [19]. Such 
examples demonstrate the usefulness of MRI as a monitoring tool for the liver and iron overload in general. 
 
Heart MRI 
T2* techniques and validated software have been developed independently by various groups for iron 
measurement of the heart. These include CMR Tools (originally from the Brompton Hospital [5]), HIPPO MIOT 
IFC-CNR [20] and later Circle CVi42 cardiac MRI package [21]. These products are software packages for reading 
and analysing digital images and offer complete MRI readings. Access to such quantification software is limited 
often by cost. There are, however, open-source online software packages that many centres in poor resourced 
countries have resorted to [22]. 
MRI measurements of cardiac iron overload have been adopted as standard practice in most thalassaemia 
treatment centres where have the technology is available. The good results of treatment adjustments 
according to measurements were identified early [6] and recognised as a major contribution to reduced 
morbidity and mortality. It is important to note that cardiac MRI serves not only to measure iron load but also 
to assess heart function using parameters such as LV function, diastolic dysfunction and Global longitudinal 
strain (GLS). Myocardial iron overload in thalassemia major may cause subclinical left ventricular (LV) 
dysfunction which manifests with abnormal strain parameters before a decrease in ejection fraction (EF). Early 
detection of MIO using cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR)-T2* is vital and will provide the possibility of 
timely prevention of worsening heart function by intensifying iron chelation [23,24, 25]  
The unavailability of MRI to study both myocardial iron and heart function, has led many centres to study the 
correlation between any echocardiographic parameters, which would correlate with MRI findings and so make 
such findings an alternative way to timely predict the danger of heart failure; such echocardiographic 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
171 
parameters include left ventricular ejection fraction, diastolic dysfunction and global longitudinal strain. A study 
from Oman on 84 TDT patients found no correlation between any of the echo findings and the MRI T2*. [23]. A 
similar study from Greece estimated global longitudinal strain (GLS) analysis of the LV performed by speckle-
tracking imaging, which is an echocardiographic imaging technique aiming to detect LV subclinical dysfunction. 
The findings suggest that TM patients with high iron cardiac load had low left ventricular longitudinal 
deformation, although LVEF values were normal [26]. Similar results are reported form other centres, 
emphasising the need for parallel echocardiographic studies [27]. 
Pancreatic MRI 
Pancreatic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using multi-echo gradient-echo sequences is not a routine 
investigation at this time. Pancreatic iron overload has been found to be predictive of cardiac iron overload in 
TM patients, and responsive to iron chelation [28, 29]. Also, pancreatic iron accumulation measured by 
gradient-echo imaging is associated with fasting glucose, and is an effective way to discriminate between 
patients with impaired glucose function and normoglycemia [30]. 
 
 
 
Pituitary Volume by MRI 
Pituitary volume and iron load may require 3T MRI to predict the risk of hypogonadism in beta Thalassemia [32]. 
Various approaches have been put forward to address these difficulties. One example is the ‘ultrafast TIC-TOC 
method’, which is a technique developed using T1 for heart and liver iron content [20]. The purpose is to reduce 
magnet time and complex analysis, thus reducing costs in high-prevalence and low-resource settings. A clinical 
study found that it was possible to scan six subjects per hour and detect liver and heart iron in 99%. This 
approach has not been universally adopted, and for many countries, accessibility and affordability remain the 
main reasons why the majority of multi-transfused patients do not benefit.  
TIF has investigated the availability of MRI globally in an effort to identify the main areas of unmet need. 
The first step was to investigate whether scanners were available globally. The source for such information was 
WHO, which produces a global atlas of medical devices [22]. The corresponding pieces of evidence are 
summarised in Table 1. 
 
 
GLOBAL ACCESSIBILITY TO MRI IRON MEASUREMENTS 
Member organisations of TIF have for many years reported that patients in many locations are not 
benefitting from MRI imaging techniques. Difficulties include: 
• 
Limited MRI scanners in country or region 
• 
Competition with other community needs for scanning (e.g. cancer), thus limiting the time 
available for iron measurements 
• 
Technical limitations such as having a scanner which does not support the application for iron 
measurement, not including a cardiac module on the scanner etc. 
Limited affordability by patients where there is no benefit from health insurance coverage. 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
172 
Table 1. MRI density and possibility of iron measurement per million population (WHO data) 
COUNTRY 
WORLD 
BANK 
INCOME 
GROUP 
HUMAN 
DEVELOPMENT 
INDEX 
ESTIMATED 
NUMBER OF 
PATIENTS 
MRI DENSITY 
PER 1 
MILLION 
POPULATION 
POSSIBILITY OF 
IRON 
MEASUREMENT 
Quatar 
High 
0.855 
163 
9.22 
High 
Saudi Arabia 
High 
0.875 
8919 
9.7 
High 
Austria 
High 
0.914 
60 
25.35 
High 
Cyprus 
High 
0.873 
659 
14.021 
High 
France 
High 
0.891 
666 
16.26 
High 
Greece 
High 
0.872 
3241 
33.56 
High 
Malta 
High 
0.885 
21 
9.324 
High 
Netherlands 
High 
0.933 
350 
14.9 
High 
Spain 
High 
0.893 
100 
20.4 
High 
Singapore 
High 
0.939 
258 
7.761 
High 
Oman 
High 
0.834 
591 
4.405 
Medium 
Canada 
High 
0.922 
450 
10.1 
High 
Italy 
High 
0.883 
7044 
31.24 
High 
UK 
High 
0.920 
942 
8.6 
High 
USA 
High 
0.920 
1046 
34.66 
High 
Bulgaria 
High 
0.795 
270 
11.5 
High 
Albania 
Upper Middle 
0.791 
356 
1.576 
Low 
Brazil 
Upper Middle 
0.770 
662 
6.79 
High 
Azerbaijan 
Upper Middle 
0.754 
3300 
0.53 
Low 
Iraq 
Upper Middle 
0.689 
17000 
1.629 
Low 
Iran 
Upper Middle 
0.774 
20777 
3.8 
Medium 
Lebanon 
Upper Middle 
0.757 
375 
8.295 
High 
Jordan 
Upper Middle 
0.723 
1300 
2.062 
Low 
Malaysia 
Upper Middle 
0.804 
5980 
2.984 
Low 
Maldives 
Upper Middle 
0.747 
670 
2.898 
Low 
Mauritius 
Upper Middle 
0.790 
200 
4.822 
Medium 
Tunisia 
Upper Middle 
0.739 
742 
2.001 
Low 
Turkey 
Upper Middle 
0.806 
5500 
11.26 
High 
Romania 
Upper Middle 
0.816 
300 
12.9 
High 
Lao 
Lower Middle 
0.607 
275 
0 
None 
Morocco 
Lower Middle 
0.683 
500 
0.4 
Low 
Pakistan 
Lower Middle 
0.560 
50000 
0.220 
Very Low 
Philippines 
Lower Middle 
0.712 
600 
0.305 
Very Low 
Sri Lanka 
Lower Middle 
0.782 
3500 
0.423 
Very Low 
Egypt 
Lower Middle 
0.731 
10000 
2.0 
Medium 
Afghanistan 
Low 
0.496 
15000 
0.1 
Very Low 
Cambodia 
Low 
0.593 
160000 
0.066 
Very Low 
Myanmar 
Low 
0.584 
4080 
0.0745 
Very Low 
India 
Lower Middle 
0.633 
150000 
0.3 
Very Low 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
173 
According to Table 1 (which does not include all affected countries due to lack of data), it appears that around 
10% of the thalassaemia patient population live in countries that have high or medium possibility of MRI iron 
measurements, based on the MRI density. In fact, 89.6% live in countries with low, very low or no MRI machines/ 
million population making the measurement of iron an impossibility with the exception of an occasional 
academic centre serving a negligible number of patients. Countries with even a medium MRI density will have 
less chance to provide MRI time for thalassaemia patients when compared to the other needs for imaging in 
the general population.  
According to information gathered by TIF delegation visits, it seems that some patients benefit from MRI iron 
measurements even in countries where the service is not generally available; services are either offered in the 
private sector or in a neighbouring country, thus benefitting those who can afford to pay, representing usually 
a small minority of patients (e.g. Azerbaijan patients go to Turkey). In addition, MRI services are often available 
in academic or other centres of expertise, where they are used as tools for research, benefitting a minority of 
patients but not reaching the total of the country’s patient population. One example of this phenomenon is 
Pakistan [34]. As in many LMICs, MRI has a limited availability in Bangladesh (R2 scan/ Ferriscan/ Ferrismart is 
available in Bangladesh since 2008 in collaboration with Resonance Health at a cost of 95$, Cardiac T2* MRI is 
available since 2018 at a cost of 70$). Availability is only at the Thalassemia Foundation Hospital in Dakka and 
with limited uptake since patients have to pay the cost (Information from the local Association). In Indonesia, 
an upper middle-income country, MRI T2* examination is only available in four centres, Aceh, Jakarta, Bandung 
and Surabaya (three of them in the Java Island). MRI is not available in the central and eastern region of 
Indonesia. This has led the clinical services to assess other surrogate markers of iron overload such as serum 
transferrin saturation and ferritin and echocardiography. 61,8% of subjects of this study have normal T2* value 
yet a weak correlation between serum ferritin and left ventricular ejection fraction. Cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging remains as the recommended modality for timely detecting iron toxicity [35]. Access to T2∗ MRI should 
be provided in areas with high prevalence of TDT [36]. In Sri Lanka the first reported patients benefitting from 
Cardiac MRI from a centre in the capital Colombo was in 2022 and 42.5% of patients were found to have iron 
overload in the heart at a young age (median age 10 years) [37]. In Iran, even though there is wide availability 
of MRI tools, there is lack of insurance support for the test. The proportion of the patients who have received 
this service seems to be about 60%, as stated in a recent communication with TIF. The real figure may be less 
since out-of-pocket payment may out of reach for many families.  
The low availability of MRI for 90% of the thalassaemia population reflects the poor quality of clinical services 
offered for a chronic disease like thalassaemia. This is mostly related to the economic and developmental 
aspects of each nation and its willingness or ability to cope with complex health issues. 
In order to estimate the real availability and clinical use of MRI services across the world, TIF has attempted to 
reach two additional sources of information, the patients view of services and their vision of unmet needs, and 
the view of healthcare providers. To tap these sources of information, separate questionnaires were distributed 
and, in addition, published literature was examined. 
TIF MRI SURVEY – PART 1: THE PATIENT’S VIEW 
A total of 522 patient participants from 55 countries equally distributed across the 6 WHO regions participated 
in this questionnaire-based survey performed in October 2019. About 400 of the responders answered the 
questionnaire online, through the SurveyMonkey platform, while about 100 answered on paper during a TIF 
patient conference held in Hamburg, Germany. 
Among the 522 responders, 80% reported having thalassaemia major, 14% thalassaemia intermedia, 1% HbH 
disease and 5% other hereditary anaemias. A number of graphs that follow depict the main characteristics of 
survey responders (Figure 2, 3 and 4). 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
174 
The main findings of this survey can be summarised as follows: 
• 
Existence of accredited MRI centre: yes, 40%; no, 37%; do not know, 23% 
• 
Frequency of measuring T2*: annually, 36%; biannually, 14%; rarely, 9%; never, 41%.  
• 
Use of MRI for LIC estimation: 57% 
• 
MRI methodology for measuring LIC: T2*, 83%; R2, 17%. 
• 
Latest T2* level: >20 ms, 27%; 10–20 ms, 15%; 6–10 ms, 28%; <6 ms, 30% 
 
 
Figure 2. TIF MRI patient survey: patients’ age distribution 
 
 
Figure 3. TIF MRI patient survey: patients’ gender 
 
22%
24%
30%
18%
6%
Age Groups
0-19
20-19
30-39
40-49
50-59
41%
59%
Gender
Male
Female
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
175 
 
Figure 4. TIF MRI patient survey: responders’ capacity 
 
Regarding the level of education of participants, of 522 responders, 300 (57.5%) benefitted from tertiary 
education, 186 (35.6%) had secondary education, 22 (4.2%) stated “other” (including some infants and 14 (2.7%) 
did not answer this question. 
Overall, the level of education of the responders was generally high and 78% were adults (>20 years) and able 
in their majority to respond electronically; this means that this group of patients is not representative of the 
global thalassaemia population. The majority of patients, around 80%, live in developing countries and are 
often children or adolescents (<20 years). For this reason, responses from such countries are from a selected 
group of survivors, assumed to be beneficiaries of better than average care and so responses are skewed 
towards a better care than that of patients in the developing world. However, these patients were able to 
observe and comment on the services that they receive and their reports are indicative of what is available. 
The questionnaire tested their knowledge and awareness of MRI services. The responses are not analysed by 
country but by groups of countries that share some common characteristics. For example, in Europe, countries 
that have traditionally developed services due to high prevalence were separated from those that host patients 
from migration and have low prevalence in the indigenous population. 
 
Europe 
A total of 82 responders live in the WHO European Region. European countries are divided into 3 groups: 
1. 
The high-prevalence countries that have developed policies of control from the 1970s (Italy, Greece, 
Cyprus, United Kingdom, and France) - 41 responders 
2. Low- prevalence countries where thalassaemia has been introduced more recently through migrations 
and services are developed locally and not through a national strategy (Germany, Austria, Belgium, 
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland) - 24 responders 
3. 
Countries where the indigenous population is affected but services are not part of a national strategy 
aiming at ensuring optimal care for all (Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Azerbaijan, North Macedonia, 
Malta, Spain, Turkey) - 17 responders 
81%
17%
2%
Capacity
Patient
Parent
Other
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
176 
✓ Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not 
From the distribution of responses to this question (Figure 5), it is concluded that patients from Group 
1countries either know or have confidence that the MRI centres that serve them have accreditation and are 
presumed to be accurate in their results. Likewise, patients from Group 2 countries, which are countries with 
strong health service infrastructure, are less confident but also are most likely to state ignorance if the MRI 
centres are accredited. Patients who live in Group 3 countries have the least confidence in the MRI services. 
 
Figure 5. Knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving the patient is accredited or not (Europe) 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron 
The distribution of responses to this question (Figure 6) indicates that patients from group 1 countries are aware 
(by 78%) that T2* is the most commonly used method while patients in the other country groups are uncertain 
by around 60%. 
 
Figure 6. Knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (Europe) 
 
76%
33%
12%
7%
18%
71%
17%
41%
18%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Group 1 countries
Group 2 countries
Group 3 countries
Patient view of the accreditation of MRI centres in their country setting
Accredited MRI centres
Not accredited
Do not know
78%
25%
29%
12%
16%
11%
9%
58%
59%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Group 1 countries
Group 2 countries
Group 3 countries
Patient's knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron in their setting
T2*
R2
Do not know
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
177 
✓Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level 
Poor knowledge of their own liver iron (Figure 7) is evident in most patients, in all three country groups, even 
though this is much worse in groups 2 and 3. Overall, 42.7% of all European patients were able to state a level 
of liver iron but only 28% stated levels below 7mg/g dry weight; 57.3% were not told or did not search or had no 
measurement at all. 
 
Figure 7. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Europe) 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron measurements 
Similar to knowledge of liver iron, knowledge of cardiac iron (Figure 8) was evident but with more profound 
differences. Group 1 countries had very few patients who did not know their results and many more with normal 
T2* value. Where services are long standing and organised patients have better results as well as being more 
aware of their clinical status. 
 
 
Figure 8. Patients’ knowledge of cardiac iron measurements (Europe) 
36%
17%
23%
15%
8%
0%
3%
8%
6%
46%
66%
71%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Group 1 countries
Group 2 countries
Group 3 countries
Liver iron levels as stated by patients
<7mg/g dw
7-15mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
Do not know
44%
4%
12%
12%
4%
6%
19%
17%
29%
17%
17%
12%
7%
58%
42%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Group 1 countries
Group 2 countries
Group 3 countries
Levels of T2* cardiac iron according to patient reports
>20ms
10-20ms
6-10ms
<6ms
Do not know
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
178 
The Americas and Australia 
The countries of the American continent host haemoglobin disorders from immigrant populations. However, 
these are migrations dated a long time ago and several generations of migrants from southern Europe, the 
Middle East, Asia and Africa must currently be regarded as an indigenous group. Patients who have responded 
to our questionnaire are from the USA, Canada, Argentina, Trinidad &Tobago. We have included Australia in this 
group since there are many common characteristics in terms of population structure but also health 
infrastructure. A total of 113 patients have responded, most from USA and Australia. 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not 
Overall, 66 patients (58.4%) reported that they believed that their MRI centre had accreditation, 25 patients 
(22.1%) that their centres were not accredited and 22 patients (19.5%) that they did not know. These results are 
close to those of patient experience in Western Europe which included 65 patients (country groups 1 and 2; 
Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9. Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not (Americas and Western 
Europe) 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron 
In this question, also patients living in the Americas gave answers comparable to those given by patients living 
in Western Europe (country groups 1 and 2; Figure 10). 
60
58
17
23
3
19
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Western Europe
Americas
Accreditation of MRI centres in Western Europe and 
the Americas
Accredited
Not accredited
Do not know
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
179 
 
Figure 10. Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (Americas and Western Europe) 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level 
From this question, Trinidad and Tobago have been excluded since the patients stated that no liver iron 
measurements were made by MRI. Although results between the Americas and Europe are quite close the 
proportion of patients who reported <7mg/g dry weight is 7% higher in European patients (Figure 11). 
 
Figure 11. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Americas and Western Europe) 
 
57
55
14
18
29
36
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Western Europe
Americas
Method used for liver measurements by MRI
T2*
R2
Do not know
28
22
12
10
4
3
55
65
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Western Europe
Americas
Patient reported liver iron levels
<7mg/g dw
7-15mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
Do not know
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
180 
✓Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level 
In the reported results of cardiac iron, the range of results is again similar (Figure 12). 
 
Figure 12. Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level (Americas and Western Europe) 
For the purpose of further comparisons among groups of countries, the European (Mediterranean + Western 
Europe) and American groups and other groups (such as Middle East and Asia), Europe and America will be 
considered as a single group under the title West. 
 
The Arab World (Middle East and North Africa Countries) 
 
The Arab countries / territories were divided into 2 groups: 
1. 
Those of relatively low income - Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Morocco and Palestine. From these 
countries / territories, there were 45 responses. 
2. Those of high income - Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Oman or, in the case of 
Lebanon, those that have developed thalassaemia services. In this group, there were only 11 
responses, and only the United Arab Emirates stand out with positive outcomes. 
Despite the diversities between these 2 country groups, the observed differences were not obvious, possibly 
due to the small sample from the group 2. 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not 
Most patients stated that the MRI centres had not gone through an accreditation process (Figure 13); only 9 out 
of 56 patients (16%) thought that their centres were accredited and of them, 6 patients originated from the 
high-income group (United Arab Emirates). 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Western Europe
Americas
T2* Cardiac: Americas vs Western Europen
>20ms
10-20ms
6-10ms
<6ms
Do not know
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
181 
 
Figure 13. Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not (Arab World) 
 
✓Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron 
In the answers provided herein (Figure 14), a new response emerged as a major concern, the response that LIC 
is not measured at all; almost 70% of patients gave this answer, mostly from Iraq. Still, patients from Palestine, 
Morocco, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia gave the same response. 
 
Figure 14. Patient's knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (Americas and Western Europe) 
 
✓ Patient’s knowledge of their liver and cardiac iron level 
It is expected, that since the majority of patients in Arab countries do not have their LIC measured that very few 
patients will know their result. In fact, only 4 patients (7.4%) were able to give a figure for LIC (3 had <7mg/g dry 
weight and one had >15). Likewise, only 11 (20.4%) gave a result for cardiac iron (3 had <20ms, 2 had 10-29ms, 
1 6-10ms and 5 had <6ms), while the rest could not give a result. 
Overall, the MRI services in the Arab countries are very different from those in European/American countries, 
from the patients’ view. Unmet needs and inequalities are becoming more obvious. 
 
 
9
22
23
0
5
10
15
20
25
Centres accredited
Not accredited
Ndo not know
Accreditation of centres
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Measured by T2*
Measured by R2
Not measured
Do not have
Knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron
Method to measure LIC in the Arab countries
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
182 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
This country is treated separately since it developed comprehensive services for its large thalassaemia 
population earlier that most other Middle Eastern countries. 26 patients responded to the questionnaire, which 
is a reasonable number for a single country. The results are very different from the Arab countries with only few 
patients not knowing their MRI results. From these results (Figures 15-19), it appears that Iranian patients have 
outcomes concerning iron load in liver and heart that are comparable to those of the traditional parts of Europe. 
It must be remembered, however, that results concern small samples of patients who may not be representative 
of the total number of patients across each country or country group. However, in the absence of official 
registries and electronic patient records, patients’ view is an important indicator of patient-reported outcomes, 
and as an indicator of unmet needs that must be taken seriously. In Iran, university centres provide data using 
MRI measurements on various aspects of clinical research, including the correlation of cardiac biomarkers and 
myocardial iron overload [38], evaluating heart function in iron overloaded patients [39], predicting pulmonary 
hypertension [40] and others. 
 
 
Figure 15. Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not (Iran) 
 
Figure 16. Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (Iran) 
 
Figure 17. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Iran) 
73
23
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
accredited centres
Not accredited
do not know
69.2
11.5
19.3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
T2*
r2
do not know
57.6
15.4
4
23
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
<7mg/g dw
7-15 mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
do not know
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
183 
 
 
Figure 18. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Iran versus European country group 1) 
 
 
Figure 19. Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level (Iran versus European country group 1) 
 
Indian Subcontinent 
The Indian Subcontinent consists of India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and the Maldives. Concerning 
the thalassaemia syndromes and haemoglobin disorders in general, this is the global hub. The estimated 
number of beta thalassaemia patients is around 35-40% of the world thalassaemia population, given the 
inaccuracies in data recording. In this survey, 183 patients responded with the following results. 
58
37
15
15
4
3
23
47
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Iran
Europe 1
LIC in Iran and Europe - patient's view
<7mg/g dw
7-15mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
Do not know
38
44
12
13
23
19
12
17
15
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Iran
Europe 1
Knowledge of cardiac iron by Iranian patients compared to Europe 1
T2* >20mcs
10-20ms
6-10ms
<6ms
Do not know
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
184 
 
✓ Patient’s knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not 
Faith that MRI centres have gone through an accreditation process is probably not within the patients’ scope; 
however, the positive responses reflect the patients’ impression and confidence in the results that this 
technology is bringing. The vast majority either do not know or are sure that there is no accreditation (Figure 
20). 
 
Figure 20. Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not (Indian Subcontinent) 
 
✓ Patient’s knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron 
Measurement of liver iron, if measured at all, it is mostly by T2*. R2 has been used only where sponsorship was 
offered or for the purposes of a clinical trial. Patient responses are based on practical experience and may not 
just be impressions. This is reflected also in the knowledge of their results (Figure 21). 
 
Figure 21. Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (Indian Subcontinent) 
 
✓ Patient’s knowledge of their liver iron level 
The vast majority of patients cannot give a result since LIC is not measured (Figure 22). This also demonstrates 
the great inequality, in which a minority of patients benefit from limited services, because they can afford such 
services and often go abroad to find the service they need. 
15.3
69.9
14.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Accredited MRI
Not accredited
Do not know
Column2
Column1
percentage
33
5
62
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
T2*
R2
not measured
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
185 
 
 
Figure 22. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Indian Subcontinent) 
 
✓ Patient’s knowledge of their cardiac iron level 
Unlike LIC, more patients have knowledge of their cardiac iron measured by MRI (Figure 23). However, in the 
Indian subcontinent, this still applies to only 40% of respondents, who represent an adult group of survivors and 
so selected for age and education. The total picture of the subcontinent is much worse. 
 
Figure 23. Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level (Indian Subcontinent) 
 
The Far East 
The responses from this part of Asia were very few from each country, mostly single case, with the exception 
of Malaysia, from which 31 patients responded. Even though these countries are at very different levels of 
economic and social development, it was not possible to divide them and so the results reflect mostly Malaysia. 
Patients that have responded include Malaysia (31), Chinese territories (mainland, Hong Kong SAR and Taiwan, 
6 patients), Indonesia (6), Singapore (1), Philippines (1), Thailand (1), Viet Nam (3), making a total of 50 
responses. 
6.6
6.6
5.5
81.3
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
LIC <7mg/g dw
7-15mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
Do not know
5.5
7.2
14.9
14.4
58
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
T2* >20ms
10-20ms
6-10ms
6ms
do not know
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
186 
 
✓ Patients’ knowledge of whether the MRI centre serving them is accredited or not 
Concerning accreditation of MRI centres, 52% of patients thought that their centres were accredited, while 20% 
thought not; only 28% stated that they did not know.  
 
✓ Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron 
Half of patients (50%) were aware that T2* is used to measure liver iron, while 15.7% had been tested by R2 
(this reflects the limited use of R2 globally); 35% did not know what is used. 
 
✓ Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level 
In this part of the world, LIC is either not measured in the majority of patients or they are not informed (Figure 
24). 
 
Figure 24. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (Far East) 
In this part of the world, LIC is either not measured in the majority of patients or they are not informed (Figure 
24). 
 
✓ Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level 
As in other parts of the world, patients in Asian countries have better knowledge of the heart results compared 
to liver iron. Considering again the nature of this sample of patients (selected for age and education), the fact 
over 30% are ignorant or have not had MRI testing Is a reflection of the inequities in the availability and use of 
services. Ignorance in itself reflects a dependency on the medical provider and a lack of self-reliance, with all 
the consequences. 
 
Figure 25. Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level (Far East) 
14
10
2
74
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
LIC <7mg/g dw
7-10mg/g dw
>15mg/g dw
do not know
16
12
26
14
32
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
T2* >20ms
10-20ms
6-10ms
<6ms
Do not know
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
187 
 
Global Comparative Results 
The results of the present patient survey are indicative of serious deficiencies in the use of MRI services to 
monitor iron load, at least from the patients’ views. Importantly, there deficiencies are not totally related to the 
lack of resources and infrastructure, since European and American countries still seem to have serious gaps in 
the MRI service provision to thalassaemia patients. In addition, even though the above results have been 
derived by an educated adult group of patients, they reflect to a great extent what patients have learnt from 
their caretakers. Ignorance of the MRI methods used to measure LIC (Figure 26) or failure to report the liver or 
cardiac iron level (Figures 27 and 28) indicate that educated patients are not being well informed by their 
treating physicians, thus being in a poor position to partner in decisions concerning their care. 
Despite the inherited selection bias of this survey and the small sample sizes compared to the global 
thalassaemia population, the depicted patient views are of value and the identified service and information 
gaps must be regarded as significant. 
 
 
Figure 26. Patients’ knowledge of the method used to measure liver iron (global comparison) 
 
 
Figure 27. Patients’ knowledge of their liver iron level (global comparison) 
 
9.75
19.2
36
36.3
61
61.7
80.4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
76.9
53.6
33.6
29.3
26
18.5
7.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
188 
 
Figure 28. Patients’ knowledge of their cardiac iron level (global comparison) 
 
TIF MRI SURVEY – PART 2: THE PHYSICIAN’S VIEW 
TIF conducted in 2014 a questionnaire-based survey involving physicians from 111 reference centres providing 
care to thalassaemia patients in 33 countries. According to this survey, physicians stated that that MRI T2* for 
cardiac iron was available to all 111 centres (100%). Ferriscan (R2, Figure 29) was available to 57 centres (51%); 
the distribution of these centres were: Europe 45.6%, Americas & Australia 29.8%, Arab countries 12.3%, Asia 
5.3%, Iran 7%; no centres reported having R2 in the Indian subcontinent. 
TIF experience today is not very different from what is depicted form the above figures, and it is still not possible 
to tell from the reports provided by professionals or treatment centres whether all or selected patients are 
benefitting from MRI services. These pieces of evidence should therefore be examined in parallel to the 
corresponding patient-reported data, previously presented in this chapter. 
 
Figure 29. Availability of Ferriscan (R2) for liver iron monitoring across the world 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
45.60%
29.80%
0.00%
5.30%
7%
R2 available
Europe
Americas &Australia
Arab countries
Asia
Iran
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
189 
A literature survey on MRI results in thalassaemia patients, published data were derived by centres from the 
following countries: USA, UK, Italy, Greece, France, Iran, Turkey, China (mainland, Hong Kong, Taiwan), 
Indonesia, Thailand, India, Qatar, Oman, Israel, Vietnam and Australia. Physicians from these countries have 
published studies on a limited number of patients, mostly treated in academic centres. There is no indication of 
whether the total thalassaemia population in these countries is served by MRI monitoring according to 
guidelines, or whether only selected patients have been included in these studies. 
It is still interesting to report results of MRI iron measurements, in particular, the proportion of patients with 
either normal-range results or those with severe iron overload, as these are good indicators of outcomes (Table 
2). 
 
Table 2. Reported cardiac MRI T2* values examples from different countries; also indicating the different range of 
results from older to more recent reports. 
Country 
Source 
Sample size 
T2* <10ms 
T2* 10-20ms 
T2* >20ms 
United 
Kingdom 
Anderson Eur 
Heart J 20015 
109 
20 
43 
37 
Hong Kong 
SAR 
Au WY Haematol 
200841 
180 
26 
24 
50 
Turkey 
Karakus, Indian J 
Hematol Blood 
Transfus. 201742 
95 TDT 
12.6% 
18.9% 
65.3% 
Thailand 
Chaosuwannakit, 
Tomography. 
2021 43 
119 TDT+NTDT 
3.5% 
14.2% 
82.35% 
Egypt 
Batouty, 
Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2024 44 
57 TDT 
5.3% 
14% 
80.7% 
Italy 
Longo, Blood 
Transfus. 2021 45 
756 
3% 
12% 
85% 
Malaysia 
Hoe, Front 
Radiol. 2022 46 
39 
7.7% 
15.4% 
76.9% 
Indonesia 
Atmakusuma, 
Acta Med 
Indones. 2021 47 
62 
11.3% 
27.4% 
61.3% 
Greece 
Kattamis, 
EJHaem. 2023 48 
208 
2.5% 
4.5% 
90.5% 
 
 
 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
190 
CONCLUSION 
Although MRI measurement of cardiac and liver iron has proven as an invaluable tool to guide effectively iron 
load monitoring and importantly chelation therapy, this service remains far from reaching all patients; in fact, 
validated MRI measurements seem to be accessible to only a small minority of them. Patients lack, in their 
majority across most countries with medium to high disease prevalence as well as in those with low disease 
prevalence but large populations, adequate and appropriate knowledge on the value of not only the availability 
and use of MRI technology but very importantly of any accurate and reliable measurements of iron overload. 
Unavailability is of particular concern but so is the need for patients and families to either fully or partially cover 
the cost of MRI measurements. In addition, unreliable and inaccurate measurements resulting from the lack of 
appropriate and regular software validation/calibration may seriously mislead treatment decisions. NGOs like 
TIF have a duty to advocate for the increased availability and accessibility of patients to validated MRI services, 
while alternative solutions must be considered, where this is possible. In this context, a group of thalassaemia 
specialist have suggested an algorithm to be followed in the latter case (Figure 30). 
 
 
Figure 30. An algorithm to guide clinical use of MRI for the diagnosis of cardiac and liver iron overload in patients 
with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia when availability is limited (from Viprakasit V, Ajlan A, Aydinok Y, et al. 
Am J Hematol. 2018;93:E135-E1 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
191 
REFERENCES 
1. Zurlo MG, De Stefano P, Borgna-Pignatti C, Di 
Palma A, Piga A, Melevendi C, Di Gregorio F, 
Burattini MG, Terzoli S. Survival and causes of 
death in thalassaemia major. Lancet. 1989; 
2(8653): 27-30 
2. Borgna-Pignatti C, Cappellini MD, De Stefano P, 
Del Vecchio GC, Forni GL, Gamberini MR, Ghilardi 
R, Origa R, Piga A, Romeo MA, Zhao H, Cnaan A. 
Survival and complications in thalassa3emia. Ann 
N.Y. 
Acad 
Sci. 
2005; 
1054: 
40-7 
doi: 
10.1196/annals.1345.006.  
3. Ladis V, Chouliaras G, Berdousi H, Kanavakis E, 
Kattamis C. Longitudinal study of survival and 
causes of death in patients with thalassemia major 
in Greece. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005; 1054:445-50. 
doi: 10.1196/annals.1345.067. 
4. Aldouri MA, Wonke B, Hoffbrand AV, Flynn DM, 
Ward SE, Agnew JE, Hilson AJ. High incidence of 
cardiomyopathy in beta-thalassaemia patients 
receiving regular transfusion and iron chelation: 
reversal by intensive chelation. Acta Haematol. 
1990; 84: 113-7 doi: 10.1159/000205046. 
5. Anderson LJ, Holden S, Davis B, Prescott E, 
Charrier CC, Bunce NH, Firmin DN, Wonke B, Porter 
J, Walker JM, Pennel DJ. Cardiovascular T2-star 
(T2*) magnetic resonance for the early diagnosis of 
myocardial iron overload. Eur Heart J. 2001; 
22:2179 DOI: 10.1053/euhj.2001.2822 
6. Modell B, Khan M, Darlison M, Westwood MA, 
Ingram D, Pennell DJ. Improved survival of 
thalassaemia major in the UK and relation to T2* 
cardiovascular magnetic resonance. J Cardiov Mag 
Resonance. 2008; 10:42 doi: 10.1186/1532-429X-
10-42 
7. Chouliaras G, Berdoukas V, Ladis V, Kattamis A, 
Chatziliami A, Frangodimitri C, Karabatsos F, 
Youssef J, Karagiorga-Lagana M. Impact of 
magnetic resonance imaging on cardiac mortality 
in thalassaemia major. J Magn Reson Imaging. 
2011; 34(1): 56-9 doi: 10.1002/jmri.22621.  
8. Jensen PD, Jensen FT, Christensen T, Ellegaard J. 
Non-invasive Assessment of Tissue Iron Overload 
in the Liver by Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Br J 
Haematol, 87 (1): 171-84 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2141.1994.tb04888.x 
9. Brittenham GM, Sheth S, Allen CJ, Farrell DE. 
Transfusional Iron Overload in Sickle Cell Disease. 
Semin Hematol. 2001; 38 (1 Suppl 1), 37-56 doi: 
10.1016/s0037-1963(01)90059-9 
10. St Pierre TG, Clark PR, Chua-anuson W, Fleming 
AJ, Jeffrey GP, Olynyk JK, Pootrakul P, Robins E, 
Lindeman R. Noninvasive measurement and 
imaging of liver iron concentration using proton 
magnetic resonance. Blood. 2005; 105(2): 855- 861 
doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-01-017  
11. Angelucci E, Brittenham GM, McLaren CE, 
Ripalti M, Baronciani D, Giardini C, Galimberti M, 
Polchi P, Lucarelli G. Hepatic Iron Concentration 
and Total Body Iron Stores in Thalassemia Major. N 
Engl 
J 
Med. 
2000; 
343 
(5): 
327-31doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200008033430503 
12. Lidén M, Adrian D, Widell J, Uggla B, Thunberg 
P. Quantitative T2* imaging of iron overload in a 
non-dedicated 
centres 
- 
Normal 
variation, 
repeatability and reader variation. Eur J Radiol 
Open. 
2021 
May 
24;8:100357. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ejro.2021.100357 
13. Labranche R, Gilbert G, Cerny M, Vu KN, 
Soulières D, Olivié D, Billiard JS, Yokoo T, An Tang. 
Liver Iron Quantification with MR Imaging: A 
Primer for Radiologists. RadioGraphics. 2018; 
38(2): 
392-412 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018170079 
14. Henninger B, Alustiza J, Garbowski M, Gandon 
Y. Practical Guide to Quantification of Hepatic Iron 
With MRI. Eur Radiol. 2020; 30 (1), 383-393 doi: 
10.1007/s00330-019-06380-9 
15. Wood JC, Enriquez C, Ghugre N, Tyzka JM, 
Carson S, Nelson MD, Coates TM. MRI R2 and R2* 
mapping 
accurately 
estimates 
hepatic 
iron 
concentration 
in 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia and sickle cell disease patients. Blood. 
2005; 106(4): 1460-1465 doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-
10-3982.   
16. Garbowski MW, Carpenter JP, Smith G, 
Roughton M, Alam MH, He T, Pennell DJ, Porter JB. 
Biopsy-based 
calibration 
of 
T2* 
magnetic 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
192 
resonance for estimation of liver iron concentration 
and comparison with R2 Ferriscan. J Cardiovasc 
Magn 
Reson 
16, 
40 
(2014). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1532-429X-16-40 
17. Wunderlich AP, Cario H, Bommer M, Beer M, 
Schmidt SA, Juchems MS. MRI-based liver iron 
content determination at 3T in regularly transfused 
patients by Signal Intensity Ratio using an 
alternative analysis approach based on R2* theory. 
Rofo.2016; 188(9): 846-52 doi: 10.1055/s-0042-
108859  
18. Georgiev PG, Sapunarova KG, Goranova-
Marinova VS, Goranov SE. Reduction of Liver Iron 
Load in Adult Patients with β-Thalassemia Major 
Treated with Modern Chelation Modalities. Folia 
Med (Plovdiv). 2020 Jun 30;62(2):265-270. doi: 
10.3897/folmed.62.e39518. 
19. Atmakusuma TD, Lubis AM. Correlation of 
Serum Ferritin and Liver Iron Concentration with 
Transient Liver Elastography in Adult Thalassemia 
Intermedia Patients with Blood Transfusion. J 
Blood 
Med. 
2021 
Apr 
15;12:235-243. 
doi: 
10.2147/JBM.S303703. 
20. Positano V, Ramazzotti A, Pepe A, Salvatori C, 
Marcheschi P, Meloni A, Mangione M, Santarelli 
MF, Cianciulli P, Caruso V, Maggio A, Landini L, 
Lombardi M. Magnetic Resonance T2* Technique 
for Segmental and Global Quantification of 
Myocardial Iron : Multi-Centre Validation in the 
MIOT (Myocardial Iron Overload in Thalassemia) 
Network. 
Blood, 
2008. 
112 
(11): 
5420, 
doi.org/10.1182/blood.V112.11.5420.5420.  
21. Fernandes JL, Sampaio EF, Verissimo M, Pereira 
FB, da Silva JA, de Figueiredo GS, Kalaf JM, Coelho 
OR. Heart and liver T2 assessment for iron overload 
using different software programs. Eur Radiol. 
2011; 21(12):2503-10. doi: 10.1007/s00330-011-
2208-1 
22. K-A Git, Fioravante LAB, Fernandes JL. An 
Online 
Open-Source 
Tool 
for 
Automated 
Quantification of Liver and Myocardial Iron 
Concentrations by T2* Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging. Br J Radiol. 2015; 88 (1053), 20150269 doi: 
10.1259/bjr.20150269 
23. Nadar SK, Daar S, Abdelmottaleb WA, Shaikh 
MM, Al Mahrouqi H, Al-Raiisi M, Hassan M, Al 
Rawahi B, Al Rahbi S. Abnormal diastolic function 
and Global longitudinal strain in patients with 
Thalassemia Major on long term chelation therapy. 
Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021 Feb;37(2):643-649. 
doi: 10.1007/s10554-020-02036-8. 
24. Ojha V, Ganga KP, Seth T, Roy A, Naik N, Jagia P, 
Gulati GS, Kumar S, Sharma S. Role of CMR 
feature-tracking derived left ventricular strain in 
predicting myocardial iron overload and assessing 
myocardial contractile dysfunction in patients with 
thalassemia 
major. 
Eur 
Radiol. 
2021 
Aug;31(8):6184-6192. doi: 10.1007/s00330-020-
07599-7. 
25. Das KM, Baskaki UMA, Pulinchani A, Ali HM, 
Almanssori TM, Gorkom KV, Das A, Dewedar H, 
Sharma S. Significance of Cardiac Magnetic 
Resonance Feature Tracking of the Right Ventricle 
in Predicting Subclinical Dysfunction in Patients 
with Thalassemia Major. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 
Aug 
9;12(8):1920. 
doi: 
10.3390/diagnostics12081920.  
26. Bonios MJ, Fountas E, Delaporta P, Kyrzopoulos 
S, Kattamis A, Adamopoulos SN, Tsiapras D. Left 
ventricular deformation mechanics over time in 
patients with thalassemia major with and without 
iron overload. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2021 Feb 
9;21(1):81. doi: 10.1186/s12872-021-01897-8 
27. Barbero U, Fornari F, Gagliardi M, Fava A, Giorgi 
M, Alunni G, Gaglioti CM, Piga A, Ferrero GB, Longo 
F. Myocardial longitudinal strain as the first herald 
of cardiac impairment in very early iron overload 
state: an echocardiography and biosusceptometry 
study on beta-thalassemia patients. Am J 
Cardiovasc Dis. 2021 Oct 25;11(5):555-563.  
28. Meloni A, Pistoia L, Ricchi P, Allò M, Rosso R, 
Cuccia L, Casini T, Cecinati V, Serra M, Rossi V, Righi 
R, Renne S, Vallone A, Positano V, Cademartiri F. 
Prospective changes of pancreatic iron in patients 
with thalassemia major and association with 
chelation 
therapy. 
Blood 
Adv. 
2022 
Nov 
4:bloodadvances.2022008805. 
doi: 
10.1182/bloodadvances.2022008805.  
29. Meloni A, Pistoia L, Gamberini MR, Ricchi P, 
Cecinati V, Sorrentino F, Cuccia L, Allò M, Righi R, 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
193 
Fina P, Riva A, Renne S, Peritore G, Dalmiani S, 
Positano V, Quaia E, Cademartiri F, Pepe A. The Link 
of Pancreatic Iron with Glucose Metabolism and 
Cardiac Iron in Thalassemia Intermedia: A Large, 
Multicentres Observational Study. J Clin Med. 2021 
Nov 26;10(23):5561. doi: 10.3390/jcm10235561 
30. Huang J, Shen J, Yang Q, Cheng Z, Chen X, Yu T, 
Zhong J, Su Y, Guo H, Liang B. Quantification of 
pancreatic iron overload and fat infiltration and 
their correlation with glucose disturbance in 
pediatric thalassemia major patients. Quant 
Imaging Med Surg. 2021 Feb;11(2):665-675. doi: 
10.21037/qims-20-292. 
31. Nayak AM, Choudhari A, Patkar DP, Merchant 
RH. Pituitary Volume and Iron Overload Evaluation 
by 3T MRI in Thalassemia. Indian J Pediatr. 2021 
Jul;88(7):656-662. doi: 10.1007/s12098-020-03629-
w. 
32. Abdel-Gadir A, Vorasettakarnkij Y, Ngamkasem 
H, et al. Ultrafast Magnetic Resonance Imaging for 
Iron Quantification in Thalassemia Participants in 
the Developing World: The TIC-TOC Study 
(Thailand and UK International Collaboration in 
Thalassaemia 
Optimising 
Ultrafast 
CMR). 
Circulation. 
2016;134(5):432–434. 
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.022803 
33. Global Atlas of medical devices. WHO medical 
devices 
technical 
series. 
https://www.who.int/medical_devices/publication
s/global_atlas_meddev2017/en/ 
34. Hussain S, Hoodbhoy Z, Ali F, Hasan E, Alvi N, 
Hussain A, Ishrat K, Ur Rahman Z, Qamruddin A, 
Parvin A, Hasan BS. Reduction of cardiac iron 
overload by optimising iron chelation therapy in 
transfusion dependent thalassaemia using cardiac 
T2* MRI: a quality improvement project from 
Pakistan. Arch Dis Child. 2020 Nov;105(11):1041-
1048. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-319203.  
35. Atmakusuma TD, Kalwani R, Nasution SA, 
Rumende CM. Correlation of Serum Ferritin and 
Cardiac Iron Toxicity with Cardiac Function in 
Transfusion Dependent Beta-Thalassemia Major 
Patients. Acta Med Indones. 2021 Jul;53(3):291-
298.  
36. Fianza PI, Rahmawati A, Widihastha SH, Afifah 
S, Ghozali M, Indrajaya A, Pratama DMA, Prasetya 
D, Sihite TA, Syamsunarno MRAA, Setiabudi D, 
Fucharoen S, Panigoro R. Iron Overload in 
Transfusion-Dependent Indonesian Thalassemic 
Patients. Anemia. 2021 Apr 15;2021:5581831. doi: 
10.1155/2021/5581831 
37. Dissanayake R, Samarasinghe N, Waidyanatha 
S, Pathirana S, Neththikumara N, Dissanayake 
VHW, 
Wetthasinghe 
K, 
Gooneratne 
L, 
Wickramasinghe P. Assessment of iron overload in 
a cohort of Sri Lankan patients with transfusion 
dependent beta thalassaemia and its correlation 
with pathogenic variants in HBB, HFE, SLC40A1, 
and TFR2 genes. BMC Pediatr. 2022 Jun 
15;22(1):344. doi: 10.1186/s12887-022-03191- 
38. Saadatifar H, Niayeshfar A, Mard-Soltani M, 
Bahrampour E, Khalili S, Alinezhad Dezfuli D, 
Pouriamehr 
S. The 
correlation 
of 
cardiac 
biomarkers and myocardial iron overload based on 
T2* MRI in major beta-thalassemia. Int J 
Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 
2021 
Nov 
2. 
doi: 
10.1007/s10554-021-02458-y.  
39. Shiae Ali E, Bakhshali MA, Shoja Razavi SJ, 
Poorzand H, Layegh P. Cardiac MR images of 
thalassemia major patients with myocardial iron 
overload: a data note. BMC Res Notes. 2021 Aug 
19;14(1):318. doi: 10.1186/s13104-021-05733-2.  
40. Rezaeian N, Asadian S, Parsaee M, Toloueitabar 
Y, Hemmati Komasi MM, Shayan L, Hosseini L. The 
predictive role of cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging in determining thalassemia patients with 
intermediately to highly probable pulmonary 
hypertension. 
Echocardiography. 
2021 
Oct;38(10):1769-1777. doi: 10.1111/echo.15210.  
41. Au WY, Lam WW, Chu WW, Yuen HL, Ling AS, Li 
RC, Chan HM, Lee HK, Law MF, Liu HS, Liang R, Ha 
SY. A cross-sectional magnetic resonance imaging 
assessment of organ specific hemosiderosis in 180 
thalassemia major patients in Hong Kong. 
Haematologica. 
2008 
May;93(5):784-6. 
doi: 
10.3324/haematol.12367 
42. Karakus V, Kurtoğlu A, Soysal DE, Dere Y, 
Bozkurt S, Kurtoğlu E. Evaluation of Iron Overload 
in the Heart and Liver Tissue by Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging and its Relation to Serum 
GLOBAL REVIEW OF MRI SERVICES FOR THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
194 
Ferritin and Hepcidin Concentrations in Patients 
with Thalassemia Syndromes. Indian J Hematol 
Blood Transfus. 2017 Sep;33(3):389-395. doi: 
10.1007/s12288-016-0735-2 
43. 
Chaosuwannakit 
N, 
Makarawate 
P, 
Wanitpongpun C. The Importance of Cardiac T2* 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Monitoring 
Cardiac Siderosis in Thalassemia Major Patients. 
Tomography. 2021 Apr 
18;7(2):130-138. doi: 
10.3390/tomography7020012. 
44. Batouty NM, Tawfik AM, Sobh DM, Gadelhak 
BN, El-Ashwah S, Hussein MA, Gad M, Aziz AAAE, 
El-Shahed MA, Karam R. Global and regional 
cardiac magnetic resonance feature tracking left 
ventricular strain analysis in assessing early 
myocardial disease in β thalassemia major 
patients. J Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 
2024 Aug 
3;32(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s44348-024-00026-1. 
45. Longo F, Corrieri P, Origa R, Barella S, Sanna 
PMG, Bitti PP, Zuccarelli A, Commendatore FV, 
Vitucci A, Quarta A, Lisi R, Cappellini MD, Massei F, 
Forni 
GL, 
Piga A. Changing 
patterns 
of 
thalassaemia in Italy: a WebThal perspective. Blood 
Transfus. 
2021 
May;19(3):261-268. 
doi: 
10.2450/2020.0143-20. 
46. Hoe HG, Git KA, Loh CK, Abdul Latiff Z, Hong J, 
Abdul Hamid H, Wan Sulaiman WNA, Mohd Zaki F. 
Magnetic resonance imaging T2* of the pancreas 
value using an online software tool and correlate 
with T2* value of myocardium and liver among 
patients with transfusion-dependent thalassemia 
major. Front Radiol. 2022 Sep 6;2:943102. doi: 
10.3389/fradi.2022.943102. 
47. Atmakusuma TD, Kalwani R, Nasution SA, 
Rumende CM. Correlation of Serum Ferritin and 
Cardiac Iron Toxicity with Cardiac Function in 
Transfusion Dependent Beta-Thalassemia Major 
Patients. Acta Med Indones. 2021 Jul;53(3):291-
298. 
48. Kattamis A, Voskaridou E, Delicou S, 
Klironomos 
E, 
Lafiatis 
I, 
Petropoulou 
F, 
Diamantidis MD, Lafioniatis S, Evliati L, Kapsali E, 
Karvounis-Marolachakis 
K, 
Timotheatou 
D, 
Deligianni C, Viktoratos P, Kourakli A. Real-world 
complication burden and disease management 
paradigms in transfusion-related β-thalassaemia in 
Greece: 
Results 
from 
ULYSSES, 
an 
epidemiological, multicentre, retrospective cross-
sectional study. EJHaem. 2023 May 23;4(3):569-
581. doi: 10.1002/jha2.695. 
49. Viprakasit V, Ajlan A, Aydinok Y, Al Ebadi BAA, 
Dewedar H, Ibrahim AS, Ragab L, Trad O, Wataify 
AS, Wong LLL, Taher AT. MRI for the diagnosis of 
cardiac and liver iron overload in patients with 
transfusion-dependent thalassemia: An algorithm 
to guide clinical use when availability is limited. Am 
J 
Hematol. 
2018 
Jun;93(6):E135-E137. 
doi: 
10.1002/ajh.25075. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
195 
 
 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
196 
7. MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES 
IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
AUTHOR: Eleftheriou A. 
REVIEWERS: Alassaf A., Angastiniotis M. & Taher A.,. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The lifelong and multi-organ nature of transfusion-dependent thalassaemia is well reflected in the very content 
of this book. As patients advance in years, the basic needs in blood transfusion and iron chelation even if and 
when provided appropriately and in accordance with international standards, become gradually inadequate to 
sustain life, maintain wellbeing, and achieve social integration. For this reason, specialists in several medical 
disciplines including, but not confined to, heart, liver and endocrine, are called upon to contribute by monitoring 
and offering proactive management of iron toxicity and organ dysfunction in their field of expertise [1]. These 
considerations and needs lead to significant and multiple challenges in the organisation of integrated services 
so that the best possible conditions for patient care are achieved. 
Historically, and based on TIF’s experience through its work globally, the need for establishing day transfusion 
centres for patients with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (and other haemoglobin disorders), separate 
from the main haematology or paediatric wards, where they were ‘naturally’ admitted initially, arose first in 
areas and places where patients with these disorders were treated in sufficient numbers. This prompted policy 
makers and health care professionals, to recognise and respect that the needs of these patients are quite 
different from those of patients with malignant haematological conditions. So, through the years, different 
arrangements (as seen in Table 1 below) were promoted with regards to providing more targeted, specialised 
service to patients with haemoglobin disorders. 
 
Table 1. Provision of a specialised service to patients with haemoglobin disorders 
 
 
1. 
Within haematology departments: Development of RBC (non-malignant) clinics separated from 
malignant haematology services 
2. Dedicated space within paediatric units where patients remained well into their adolescence and in 
many cases into their adulthood 
3. 
Dedicated space within haematology units (amongst malignant haematology/oncology patients) or 
transfusion centres of hospitals 
4. Development of “independent” thalassaemia units/centres based as outpatient day care services, 
attached to/associated with tertiary level hospitals 
5. Within general paediatric or paediatric/oncology or general haematology wards/clinics without any 
arrangement for a dedicated space or development of specialised services. 
6. Development of centres run by NGOs in collaboration with pharmacists/Red Cross/ and other health 
care professionals 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
197 
Provision of specialised care extended beyond the basic care of transfusion and iron chelation began to be 
recognised as an absolute necessity in those centres where: 
1. 
There was high disease prevalence amongst the population whether in the indigenous (Cyprus, Greece, 
Italy) or in the well-established and integrated migrant population [2] (e.g. UK, France). 
2. The scientific community and the national health competent authorities recognised these as 
important disorders with medical, public health, social and economic repercussions, including the 
necessity for effective national policies for their prevention and appropriate management. 
3. 
As a result, these disorders were prioritised on the country’s national health agenda and disease 
specific policies and programmes under national co-ordination and support were developed allowing 
patients to grow, age and have a good quality of life. 
 
 
Such centres developed first in the 1980s in Mediterranean countries Cyprus, Greece and Italy and the UK and 
France; in the latter more in the context of Rare Diseases (RDs) national strategies. The knowledge and 
experience of what ‘optimal’ care entailed for these disorders as well as the better understanding of their 
pathophysiology and medical needs, were in those early days quite limited. The development of 
Reference/Expert centres was guided almost solely by the needs of the growing and increasing survival of 
patients and the services they required, the patient care pathways and the quality standards that these centres 
developed through the years. Experience and knowledge of the desired outcomes became the core and solid 
basis for setting the standards and for defining the role a Reference/Expert centre for Haemoglobin Disorders. 
Gradually these first centres were officially recognised not only by reputation but also by results and so were 
assigned by the country’s national competent authorities as Reference or Expert centres. Patients with 
haemoglobin disorders began to be referred to these centres by their treating physicians for consultation, 
second opinion or for receiving the specialised services that did not exist in their own area, region or country. 
As national competent authorities and health care specialists across the world began to acknowledge the value 
of addressing effectively these disorders and to gather knowledge and experience at national level, 
clinics/centres of variable level of expertise, offering different range of services of variable quality standards, 
begun to spring up, particularly in the 1990s, in different countries across the world. In most of these however, 
mainly basic care was provided which including blood transfusion and iron chelation while Multidisciplinary 
Care (MCD), which is an essential element of the care of the growing patients and the major component of a 
Reference/Expert centre, was and still is largely lacking. 
 
 
The integration of specialised multidisciplinary care services into the management of patients with these 
disorders brought about the need for specialised, disease-specific training/education of the different 
medical specialties and many and multiple organisational challenges to ensure appropriate co-ordination. 
Where such steps were taken and where these led to successful, meaningful integration of services, 
including active research activity, Reference or Expert Centres began to spring up. 
In most countries where more than 80% of the patients with these disorders live, there is limited medical 
and public health infrastructures, including haematology and blood transfusion services and very 
importantly lack of universal health and social care coverage. Deficits are related mainly to weak 
economies and their focus on other health priorities including communicable and common non-
communicable diseases (NCSs), and these factors have not allowed the quality advances for haemoglobin 
disorders to take place 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
198 
In a few of these countries Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) were created to promote unmet needs and 
some were even encouraged by competent national authorities to contribute to the management of 
haemoglobin disorders by either financial and social support or actually developing clinical services. These have 
developed through the years and in collaboration with medical and other health care professionals, important 
services for patients confined however only to transfusion and iron chelation therapies. Certainly, in such 
settings, provision of any extended specialised treatment is not possible. Patients, therefore, need to be and 
are referred to hospital settings in an uncoordinated manner to medical specialists, who however may not have 
specialised knowledge of the treatment of haemoglobin disorders.  
The work of TIF for more than 35 years in more than 60 countries across all Regions of the world, has brought 
awareness that the development and integration of MDC services for the management of patients with these 
disorders and the promotion and establishment of Reference/Expert Centres are far from being adopted or 
implemented for the majority of the global patient population. Such advances can only happen if and when the 
basic, essential medical care across a country has achieved those quality standards that allow patients to grow 
satisfactorily, assume social integration and have a decent quality of life, avoiding premature death. This 
prerequisite can only be achieved when the medical and public health infrastructures and quality standards are 
adequately strengthened in the context as previously mentioned of a universally coverage-based health care 
system. To date, such improvements are still to happen in most of the countries and in particular in the 
developing world, where the majority of patients with these disorders live. The majority of patients are of a 
young age not reaching beyond the second decade of their lives; this alone confirms the fact that they are still 
receiving suboptimal basic care. 
Bringing fragmented services together in an organised, collaborative manner and adopting international 
Guidelines and standards of care are indeed very challenging but it has been demonstrated beyond any doubt 
that such an effort maximises the patients’ benefits and facilitates their very cumbersome treatment pathways 
with timely interventions. Such an approach of Integrated Care Pathways is reflected in the improvement of 
outcomes [3], clinical and social, that have already happened in some countries. Achievements that have been 
experienced are related to healthcare planning related to the healthcare system of each country and to public 
health officials considering cost-effectiveness [3, 4] of optimal care. 
Basic to the success of multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary, integrated management of thalassaemia patients 
is the quality of the relationship between the haematology (or paediatric) team and the various supporting 
physicians across medical disciplines. The latter must be well organised, well-co-ordinated, interested in 
becoming involved, in acquiring experience in these conditions and very importantly they need to be supported 
and facilitated by the health care system of the country. Random consultations do not contribute to efficiency 
and effectiveness because accumulation of sufficient experience and knowledge requires a dedicated group of 
medical experts in the MDC, who will indeed be willing to receive education and better understanding of the 
management of haemoglobin disorders for those aspects that fall within their medical specialty. 
 
 
In many centres the multidisciplinary approach to thalassaemia is even misunderstood as having a 
specialist to refer to once a complication has arisen. The whole concept of MDC and of a Reference Centre 
lies on the availability of proactive, quality and specialised interventions and in this content different 
medical specialists should be involved well before the appearance of complications i.e. regular 
involvement early in the patients’ life. In a multi-organ disease like thalassaemia there is no doubt as to 
the necessity and benefits of this approach and TIF has focused considerable attention on promoting this 
concept and on creating those tools and advisory groups that could support it. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
199 
Furthermore, it is more functional if all members of the MDC team belong/have medical attachments to the 
same hospital. This is because regular meetings of the members of the MDC group must occur regularly and 
also when an emergency decision for the health/condition of a patient needs to be taken. It is understood 
however that this may not be possible, but technology through teleconferences and telemedicine tools have 
given us valuable solutions for such challenges [5]. 
 
THE ROLE OF THE COORDINATOR/LEADERSHIP 
In order to achieve effective functioning of the interdisciplinary team that could be reflected in the desired 
outcomes of early detection and reversal or minimisation of organ damage, the principles of teamworking and 
good communication must include first of all a competent team coordinator who is an expert physician in the 
clinical management of haemoglobin disorders. This should be the lead physician (haematologist, paediatrician 
etc.) who is responsible for the routine, everyday care and who sees each patient most often. Mature leadership 
will ensure that scheduled visits to each specialist are implemented and that in turn different specialists 
communicate timely and comprehensively reporting their results, to allow the treating specialist to reach a 
decision on any treatment adjustments. 
As the issue of communication is central to the functioning of the MDC team6 ensuring its effectiveness is 
important and this can be achieved in a number of ways and through for example: 
• 
Joint clinics  
• 
Regular team meetings 
• 
Case conferences 
• 
Sharing of results, along with interpretation and discussion for joint decisions 
• 
Using electronic disease-specific medical records with full access to all members of the team 
• 
Involving patients in the discussions and decisions which concern their lives is critical and every 
effort should be made by all to establish a well-structured and regular programme of active and 
meaningful patients’ engagement. 
 
Some of the key barriers therefore that may prevent the achievement of effectiveness of the work of the MDC 
include: (i) lack of appropriate and structured coordination and efficient communication, (ii) lack of or poor 
involvement of dedicated physicians across medical disciplines, (iii) inadequate implementation of common 
shared decisions (iv) lack of sufficient time given by the involved physicians to interact productively and discuss 
comprehensively the cases and (v) inadequate access to, or lack of existence of, well-informed patient records. 
 
An example of the structure of interdisciplinary team for the care of haemoglobin disorders as extracted from 
some well-established European Reference Centres7,8 with successful patient outcomes is presented in the 
Table below (Table 2): 
 
 
 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
200 
Table 2. Interdisciplinary team for the care of haemoglobin disorders 
Specialty 
Description 
Haematologist/ 
Paediatrician/ 
Internist 
Usually, the physician in charge of the routine care, including monitoring of iron load. 
Usually coordinates the multidisciplinary team. Is supported by other more junior 
physicians according to the number of patients 
Specialised 
Nurses 
Specially trained and experienced haemoglobinopathy nurses who, apart from routine 
duties like supervising blood transfusions and triage of patients, because of their closer 
contact with patients, have a significant role in counselling and psychosocial support 
Cardiologist 
A special interest and experience in the cardiac complications of thalassaemia. Monitors 
all patients from childhood, collaborates with the lead physician on any management 
modifications and takes charge when complications like arrhythmias arise 
Endocrinologist 
Monitors all patients usually from early adolescence for these very common 
complications of thalassaemia. Apart from liaison with the multidisciplinary team, there 
is collaboration with gynaecologists in the case of infertility and pregnancy. Also, part of 
the team managing bone disease 
Hepatologist 
Liver disease is increasing in the ageing thalassaemia population. Liver function is 
monitored from an early age by the clinic team but persisting disturbance of liver 
function, iron overload and viral hepatitis require a consultation with a liver specialist 
Psychologist/ 
Social Worker 
These are essential supportive services and should be part of team at all times. Many 
issues may not be recognised by other physicians or nurses and periodic visits of the 
psychologist could bring matters to the surface for all patients. They are not just for 
referral when acute emotional problems arise. Especially where universal health 
coverage is not available financial hardship, and social isolation can contribute to 
negative patient outcomes. Support for the health care team may also be necessary. 
Obstetricians 
A member of the collaborative team in intended and ongoing pregnancies. Pre-
pregnancy counselling along with mainly the haematologist, endocrinologist and 
cardiologist is essential but teamwork during gestation is also necessary for good 
outcomes. 
Dental Care 
All patients should be routinely monitored for dental and maxillary complications at least 
yearly. 
 
Specialised Nurses 
The role of nurses cannot be overemphasised since they are the professional staff most in contact with patients 
as they supervise blood transfusions as well as other clinical procedures; they are also usually present during 
the patient’s interview with the treating physician. The psychosocial care needs of children and their families 
from the perspectives of nurses was explored in Jordan. In this qualitative study nurses indicated their belief in 
holistic care, since the patients faced various challenges associated the condition and its treatment, as well as 
social burdens and therefore they need social support from the community. The nurses recognised the need for 
special knowledge and skills focusing exclusively on thalassaemia and its treatment, including communication 
skills as an effective way to interact with children and their families and build a therapeutic relationship with 
them. Although nurses believe in the importance of providing psychosocial support, the need for specialized 
individuals is recognised [9]. Studies such as this give a clear indication of the experiences of the nursing staff 
but also for the need of psychosocial support offered by a team of professionals within a service for 
haemoglobinopathy patients. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
201 
The mental health needs of haemoglobinopathy patients have been recognised as being frequent and to play 
a significant role in the quality of life which should be a major goal of holistic care. A recent report from Saudi 
Arabia demonstrated depression in 45.4% of sickle cell patients, while the rate of anxiety was 22.7%. This is 
considerable burden which the multidisciplinary service must address [10]. The role of nurses in controlling 
blood transfusions, including safety, and medications is also of primary importance.  
The role of Community nurses in raising awareness concerning thalassaemia which can benefit both the blood 
donation programme, and the prevention programme is recognised and utilised in few locations [11]. 
 
Endocrinologists 
Endocrine disorders are also found in most multitransfused patients in whom iron overload is almost 
unavoidable. In 89 patients with thalassemia major from the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, despite their 
young age (2 to 30 years - mean age 15.5 years), primary hypothyroidism was found in 17% (subclinical 
hypothyroidism in 37.7%) and diabetes in 13.6%. The rates were lower in those compliant to chelation therapy 
[12]. However, several factors affect the endocrine glands in thalassaemia, and so many patients develop more 
than one endocrinopathy [13]. This is a collection of co-morbidities affecting the aging patient which require 
specialised attention and add to the burden of disease and the requirement for care to achieve the desired 
outcomes. 
Likewise, bone disease, as measured by Bone mineral density (BMD), is a frequent and painful addition to 
patient experience. In Indonesia the percentage of adult thalassemia major and intermedia patients with low 
bone mass density was 68% at a median age 25 years (range 18-68 years) [14]. 
In conditions which affect quality of life to such an extent, like bone pain, all means to investigate and diagnose 
early bone disease so that treatment and relief measures can be taken early. 
 
Cardiologists and Hepatologists 
These are basic members of the MDC team since heart and liver complications are not only frequent but are 
also major causes of amenable mortality, along with serious infections [15, 16, 17]. 
Many other important heath care specialists are needed particularly when the centres are treating sickle cell 
disease (SCD) patients as well, which is the usual case in most centres across countries. Some of the key 
specialist services to which treating physicians and patients should have timely and well-co-ordinated access in 
this case are included in Table 3 below (which is by no means exhaustive): 
Table 3. Indicative list of key specialist services 
• 
Erythrocytapheresis 
• 
Orthopaedic service 
• 
Pulmonary hypertension team 
• 
Specialist imaging including: 
o 
MRI tissue iron quantification of the 
heart and liver with regularly standardise 
software to ensure accuracy and 
reliability of iron measurement 
o 
Trans-cranial Doppler ultrasonography 
(children) 
o 
Polysomnography and ENT surgery 
o 
Bone marrow transplantation services 
• 
Fertility, contraception and sexual health 
services 
• 
Consultant neurologist 
• 
Consultant ophthalmologist 
• 
Consultant nephrologist 
• 
Consultant urologist with expertise in 
managing priapism and erectile dysfunction 
 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
202 
THE PLACE AND ROLE OF THE PATIENT IN THE MDC OF 
HIS/HER CONDITION 
In the multidisciplinary team, one essential member, constituting the central component, is most frequently 
forgotten or his or her importance is under-recognised. This is the patient (or parent in the case of children). The 
patient’s involvement is important for the carer/patient relationship and in particular with regards to the need 
to support his/her self-management and for the continued patient concordance to prescribed treatment. There 
is need to listen and understand patient concerns18. The patient, however, requires education, continued 
provision of reliable and up to date information along with strong encouragement and empowerment to take 
charge of his/her life under specialist guidance. Treatment planning should take into consideration as far as 
possible patient preferences, choices and lifestyle so that every effort to reach concordance is made. The active 
and meaningful engagement of patients is substantial in the better understanding of the patient’s needs and 
thus in the better planning and more appropriate reforming of related policies. The aim for every Government 
and treating physician is certainly to achieve good health and quality of life of their patients associated with a 
high level of social integration. And indeed, this can only happen if and when the patient remains in the centre 
of decisions. Patient involvement aims to improve patient experience and achieve greater quality of care, that 
is comprehensive, considering physical, socioeconomic, mental and emotional well-being [19]. 
 
REFERENCE OR EXPERT CENTRES FOR HAEMOGLOBIN 
DISORDERS 
Considerable work on this topic has been conducted mainly by the European Commission of the EU and 
particularly since the 1990s in the context of its work on promoting quality services for RDs across the EU. The 
many and complex challenges faced by patients/families and treating physicians in the early and accurate 
diagnosis, management and monitoring of RD are similar to those characterising the Haemoglobin Disorders 
which in many settings are classified as RDs. The difference however is that, for haemoglobin disorders and 
contrary to the many other RDs, ample and reliable knowledge and experience exist with regards to early and 
accurate diagnosis, specialised monitoring, appropriate management and effective prevention, resulting in 
improved outcomes [15, 16, 17]. 
The European Commission recognised RDs as a priority action area since the mid- 1990s and since then, the 
different EU initiatives addressing RDs have been predominantly focusing on bringing together scattered 
resources and expertise across Member States. This is an effort that is certainly needed in the case of 
haemoglobin disorders as well both across Europe and more importantly across countries with developing 
economies where the majority of patients with these disorders live. In addition, such EU initiatives and policies 
aimed at strengthening and empowering research activities directed at providing more innovative drugs and 
therapies for RDs and importantly directed towards developing national plans in every EU member country for 
addressing more effectively the needs of RDs. Within this work, the European Commission established a special 
committee of experts, the EUCERD (European Union Committee of Experts on Rare Diseases), and focused 
work on developing quality criteria for centres of expertise for RDs in member states (2011) [20] and 
recommendations on establishing RD European Networks (ERNs) (2013) [EUCERD, 2011]. In this context the 
idea of ERNs was integrated into an EU Directive 2011/24/EU which is related to the application of EU patients’ 
rights in cross-border healthcare, acknowledging that this is a major step towards promoting more effectively 
the sharing of knowledge/expertise and best practices and the creation of clearer structures and networks in 
the area of RDs, by bringing together highly specialised providers across the EU (European Parliament, 2011) 
[21]. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
203 
Within the 24 ERNs established to cover 24 different RDs or families of RDs, aiming to share best practices for 
their care and cure, the European Blood Network (EuroBloodNet) is the one focused on Blood Disorders 
including haemoglobin disorders [22]. Considerable work is being undertaken by this network aiming to pool 
together knowledge and expertise from across the EU on these disorders [EuroBloodNet, 2021]. 
In the context of the above work of the EU, a number of relevant projects were launched including the European 
Network for Rare and Congenital Anaemias (ENERCA), more relevant to the haemoglobin disorders and other 
rare anaemias and in which TIF was a major partner. Through this activity, TIF contributed along with other 
European and International medical and scientific experts in rare anaemias to the completion, amongst other 
important deliverables, of a book titled: “The Recommendations for Centres of Expertise in Rare Anemias: A 
White Book” (Corrons et al., 2014) [7]. This document reflects the extensive work that the EU has undertaken 
for over two decades for the benefit of rare anaemias including haemoglobin disorders and the book represents 
a major contribution indeed towards the creation of a much-needed European infrastructure of expertise 
around rare anaemias. The authors of this chapter of the 4th edition of the Guidelines for the Management of 
Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia, felt that the above description was essential, as the experience gained 
through the years by EU member countries in this field, can be extended to constitute a sound basis for 
countries outside and well beyond Europe, to build on. 
Some of the benefits outlined below in Table 4 are in the context of the EU directive (2011/24/EU) (mentioned 
above) on facilitating and safeguarding the rights of patients with RDs, including rare anaemias and 
haemoglobin disorders, for obtaining cross-border health care underscore the importance of developing and 
pooling together specialised knowledge and experience as well as of networking between centres of expertise. 
From these ideas and policies, tailored to the needs and prevailing situation across any country or Region of the 
world, patients with haemoglobin disorders, the health care specialists and the health care systems at large 
could benefit significantly as has been the case with the RDs across the EU. 
 
Table 4. Benefits of cross-border healthcare in the EU for patients with rare diseases 
 
 
• 
Providing patients and health professionals access to experts and expertise throughout all European 
member states, regardless of the country of origin or practice, thereby reducing inequalities and 
maximising the cost-effective use of resources 
• 
Implementing epidemiological surveillance throughout the EU that gathers comparable data on 
patients affected by RAs and launching preventive programmes for tackling RAs 
• 
Fostering best practices for prevention, diagnosis and clinical management 
• 
Promoting the dissemination of knowledge, the sharing of expertise, supporting research, and 
increasing awareness of RAs 
• 
Facilitating the transposition of the Directive 2011/24/EU of 9 March 2011 on the application of 
patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare. The European Reference Networks (ERN) between 
healthcare providers and Centres of Expertise is a main point of interest of the directive, especially for 
rare diseases. The networks will be a tool to ‘improve the access to diagnosis and the provision of high-
quality healthcare to all patients who have conditions requiring a particular concentration of resources 
or expertise and could also be focal points for medical training and research, information 
dissemination and evaluation, especially for rare diseases. 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
204 
TIF, as a patient-driven umbrella organisation, has a constitutional mandate to continually identify ways and 
tools to promote the quality of care provided to patients with haemoglobin disorders [5]. TIF has thus focused 
particular attention and considerable work on its educational programme since its establishment in 1986 and 
in this context TIF has initiated a new project titled “TIF’s Certification Programme” focused on: the 
empowerment of national competent authorities, health care professionals and patient communities to 
dedicate work on promoting the MDC component and the establishment of Reference/Expert centres into their 
management strategy. In this new programme international thalassaemia experts have been recruited, 
standards for centres have been discussed and in early 2025 a programme of visits to centres that have 
volunteered to become reference centres is scheduled to begin.  
TIF’s vision through this project is to first identify and develop an extended list of centres/clinics within a country 
that treat patients with haemoglobin disorders, followed by an effort supported by TIF’s International experts 
to ‘classify’ them based on set criteria (see below) including the range and quality standards of the services 
provided by each of them [5]. The aim of TIF is to (i) identify those centres already qualified to perform the role 
of a Reference Centre today, (ii) to provide through its scientific advisors, support to those in treating centres 
that have the potential to upgrade their services, (iii) to support other treating centres to reach at least 
acceptable levels of quality basic care for their patients and (iv) very importantly to support the networking 
between them at national level. The Reference/Expert Centres at regional and international level to be 
promoted as practical teaching centres for healthcare professionals of all needed disciplines for 
multidisciplinary care. 
The programme focuses on the application of specific quality standards for reference centres involved with the 
care of patients with thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders. The TIF Quality Standards are based on 
the general principles already developed by the relevant organisations as outlined in Table 5 below. 
 
Table 5. General principles used for the development of TIF Quality Standards 
 
✓ The Joint Commission International (JCI): “Survey process Guide for Ambulatory Care (3rd Edition, 
2015) European Union Committee of Experts on Rare Diseases (EUCERD): Quality Criteria for Centres 
of Expertise for Rare Diseases in Member States (2011) and EUCERD recommendations on Rare 
Disease European Networks (2013) 
✓ Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice 
✓ US Institute of Medicine: Quality Improvement 
✓ US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Service Administration: Quality 
Improvement 
✓ UK NHS, Peer review of health Services for People with Haemoglobin Disorders: (2015 Review) 
✓ TIF “Guidelines for the management of transfusion dependent thalassaemia” 3rd edition 2014  
✓ TIF “Guidelines for the management of non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia” 2013 
✓ Specific standards, such as the “International Collaboration for Transfusion Medicine (ICTMG): ”Red 
blood cell specifications for patients with haemoglobinopathies: a systematic review and guideline” 
2017 
✓ ENERCA White Book  
✓ European Guidelines for the certification of Haemophilia Centres EUHANET 2013.  
✓ Current literature reviews 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
205 
The criterion for recognizing any centre as a reference/ expert centre is certainly the quality of services, with 
emphasis on patient-centred care and not just availability of various technical components necessary for 
thalassaemia (and other haemoglobin disorders) care. It includes following national or international evidence-
based guidelines, which allow for good patient outcomes. The services that should be provided by a reference/expert 
centre may include (but are not confined to): 
1. 
The capacity to provide expert diagnosis of the disease as well as its long-term complications. 
2. The capacity to provide expert case management, based on best practice guidelines including a 
multidisciplinary approach and psychosocial support. These requirements imply experienced healthcare 
personnel in adequate numbers to ensure continuity of care.  
3. 
Healthcare workers should be in a structured environment with clearly defined roles and hierarchy.  
4. Maintain a patient registry with ability to report patient outcomes and other epidemiological information. 
Electronic information systems must be regarded as essential tools for the provision of quality services.  
5. Have auditing of clinical and laboratory guidelines.  
6. Serve a sufficient number of patients to maintain staff experience. What is a sufficient number of patients 
is not clear, but a consensus should be reached – initial proposal is for at least 50 transfusion-dependent 
patients.  
7. 
Provide patients with sufficient knowledge and information to promote partnership models and self-
management support.  
8. Make a significant contribution to research as evidenced by peer reviewed publications. 
9. Establish networking with secondary treatment centres to provide education and share knowledge and 
expertise as well as providing expert opinion on challenging cases, but also with other centres of expertise 
cases.  
10. Establish networks/collaborations with other Reference Centres outside the country – regional and 
international – to share best practices. 
11. Maintain close links with patient organisations and other community resources at national, regional and 
international level.  
12. Make a major contribution to educational activities. 
13. Provides evidence of the improvement of survival, clinical outcomes and quality of life and patients’ 
satisfaction through specific tools including patient- reported outcomes. 
In addition, (i) there must be evidence of Government and more specifically health system support, (ii) free 
access of patients to treatment modalities, (iii) the centres’ administrative structure, working hours and clinical 
space availability must also be taken into consideration, with the patient experience in mind, (iv) deficiencies 
and gaps must be promptly identified and corrected, (v) regularly assess the experience and knowledge of 
professional staff and (vi) the patient perceptions of the quality of the services and the relationship with the 
staff should be monitored regularly through professional tools and taken into account in quality assessment. 
TIF Standards as described in TIF’s project for assessing the quality of the services provided to patients with 
haemoglobin disorders in the different domains comprising a Reference Centre are outlined in Tables 6 – 12 
below. 
 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
206 
Table 6. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Governance criteria 
 
 
Table 7. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Safety criteria 
 
 
1. Governance 
• 
The existence of a hierarchical structure, ordained by law and policy. This should include a chief 
executive/ managing director and a professional team which is coordinated and includes 
multidisciplinary services, recognising the complex pathology of haemoglobin disorders. 
• 
A clear definition of the centre’s mission and the existence of policies and programmes to fulfil 
the mission. 
• 
Ensuring staff qualifications, experience and continual education 
• 
Monitoring and evaluating the functions of the centre by the management, including staff 
performance and patient safety 
• 
The existence of plans for quality improvement and advocacy to health authorities 
• 
Connection with patient support associations and patient representation on advisory bodies, 
taking into account all stakeholders’ views regarding matters of priority and focus on any quality 
improvement activity.  
• 
All decisions are based on data, obtained through patient records and outcomes, as well as any 
new developments that have been noted through publications and trials.  
• 
A culture promoting ethical practices in all aspects of administration and clinical care, 
considering internationally accepted patients’ rights. 
2. Safety Concerns  
• 
Staff education on safety is programmed. 
• 
Patient identification is clear in individual records (electronic or paper based) of blood 
transfusions and laboratory results. 
• 
There is effective patient communication and explanation of all interventions. 
• 
Haemovigilance and pharmacovigilance are practised, including drug safety alerts. 
• 
There are evidence-based hand hygiene guidelines. 
• 
There are measures to reduce accidents, such as falls, in the centre. A secure environment is 
planned and regularly inspected. Hazardous material handling and disposal (such as needles) are 
part of the centre’s daily procedures. 
• 
There are treatment rooms and resuscitation equipment.  
• 
The country’s fire services have certified the centre for fire safety. This includes regular testing of 
any devices required for fire control. 
• 
Cigarette and other smoking is forbidden on the premises. 
• 
Emergency procedures are in place in the event of power and water cuts or contamination. 
Monitoring water quality is performed regularly. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
207 
Table 8. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Access to care criteria 
 
 
Table 9. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Doctor: Patient Partnership criteria 
 
 
3. Access to Care  
• 
The centre clearly serves benign haematology patients and does include malignancies as they 
constitute a dangerous and vulnerable cohabitator. 
• 
Patient flow: there must be adequate numbers of patients of each diagnostic group: at least 50 
thalassaemia patients and/or 50 SCD patients for the centre to be regarded as experienced. 
• 
Continuity of care is safeguarded by low staff turnover and the presence of experienced and 
qualified caregivers. 
• 
Clinical records with lifetime data are kept. 
• 
Multidisciplinary care is provided with a referral system where necessary, and there is 
collaboration with in-patient services. 
• 
Networking with secondary centres as well as with other centres of excellence, nationally or 
internationally is an added value. A twinning programme with an academic centre is also an 
additional advantage. 
• 
Any existing electronic health record must fulfil all the requirements of patient safety, including 
patient consent, confidentiality and anonymisation in data storage and sharing of data for 
research.  
• 
Barriers to patient access, including distance, language, cultural or religious barriers are 
considered and dealt with. 
• 
Respect for patient rights and time is a must in all cases. 
• 
Informed consent for all procedures is obtained. 
4. Partnership Model  
• 
Adequate information about the disease and any treatment decisions, including possible side 
effects, is always provided to patients and their families. 
• 
Patients are given choices about their treatment. 
• 
Self-management is encouraged. 
• 
Special attention to patient adherence is given and the patients supported appropriately. 
• 
Workshops for patients/families are held regularly, at least once a year. 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
208 
Table 10. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Existence/Implementation of Guidelines criteria 
 
Table 11. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Actions for quality improvement criteria 
 
5. Guidelines and Standards for Clinical Care 
• 
Evidence based national guidelines, put together by experts in the field, or international 
guidelines (e.g., TIF’s) are used in the centre and adhered to. 
• 
Pain screening is performed, and a pain management system is in place. 
• 
Assessing the quality of laboratory and other technologies used to monitor patients is the 
responsibility of the clinical team which must alert the providers of any divergent or inaccurate 
results. 
• 
Infection control procedures are part of the clinical standards of the centre. 
• 
Availability of food during day care is necessary and the quality and nutritional value must be 
monitored. 
• 
Blood transfusion procedures and standards according to international directives are kept 
• 
Any medical treatment, such as IV fluids and exchange transfusions, are provided according to 
standards that ensure patient safety.  
• 
Continual medical and other professional education are part of the centres long term 
programme. 
• 
Staff qualifications, skills, knowledge and experience are defined and described, along with the 
job description of each. 
• 
Staff/patient ratio is defined approximately as 1 doctor per 100 patients and 1 nurse per 50 
patients. 
6. Quality Improvement 
• 
Having surveyed all aspects of the service, and noted all strengths and weaknesses, the survey 
team will present a report and also make suggestions for quality improvement where necessary. 
• 
Quality improvement is a systematic approach to changes aiming to upgrade services and 
correct any deficiencies in the governance, structure and functions of the service. ‘Quality 
improvement includes better patient experience and outcomes, by changing provider 
behaviour’ (Dr John Ovretveit: “Does improving quality save money?”) 
• 
The way in which change is introduced and implemented is a matter of concern and may require 
expert advice. In this process the following are considered: 
• 
External influences, such as governmental policies or interest, budgetary support, professional 
requirements.  
• 
Understanding the issues involved at all levels, including why a problem exists. 
• 
Setting goals and monitoring progress. 
• 
Choosing the tools to bring about change. These could be skills development, computerisation, 
updating guidelines etc. 
• 
Full staff engagement is necessary. There often needs to be a multidisciplinary approach to 
change-making. 
• 
The patient’s voice must be involved at all stages of quality improvement. Patients/families can 
also effectively monitor the effects and benefits of change since they experience the whole 
‘patient pathway’. 
• 
Studying other centres’ experience in change-making: have the changes been successful 
elsewhere? 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
209 
Table 12. TIF Quality Standards for Reference Centres – Information Management criteria. 
 
 
Through this Certification Programme, TIF may provide: 
• 
On-site audit of the centre’s performance by external reviewers with regards to the quality of the 
processes, outcomes and structures involved in the care it provides to haemoglobinopathy patients. 
• 
Technical support and recommendations for improvement to reach desired outcomes. 
• 
Networking opportunities with other regional and international centres for the exchange of 
knowledge and expertise. 
 
Successful centres are granted the Certificate of TIF Collaborating Reference Centre for Haemoglobinopathies 
and provided with needs-based technical support and personalised recommendations for continuous 
improvement in order to reach the desired outcomes. 
The Certificate is valid for a period of 2 years before the evaluation team is called back to the centre to ensure 
that quality of care is maintained. 
 
 
7. Information Management 
• 
Patient records (paper or electronic) are kept with due consideration to confidentiality, security 
and accuracy of data. 
• 
The retention time of records in a haemoglobinopathy setting is lifelong, since the current 
clinical condition may be influenced by past events and disease control (such as iron levels). 
• 
Standard diagnosis codes are kept (e.g., ICD10). 
• 
E-health systems are assessed and tested prior to implementation, for quality and patient safety. 
• 
Protection against loss, unauthorised access or use is ensured. 
• 
Policies and procedures concerning record keeping are clearly directed to all the staff, through 
documents and training. 
• 
The patient should be clearly identified on each record. 
• 
Those authorised to have access to clinical records are clearly defined. 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
210 
Table 13. The key goals of this programme 
 
Certainly, such upgrading of a centre’s services and quality standards requires considerable national 
collaboration, support and funding and this can only be achieved if and when its value to the patients, the 
health care professionals and the health care system itself are well recognised by the competent 
authorities and it must be emphasised that TIF’s close and official collaboration with the national 
authorities is a prerequisite for any activity related to this project. 
This initial work of TIF cannot and is not meant to replace the value of quality assessing tools including 
simple but valuable ones such as audit and peer review, already practiced in many countries mainly of the 
Western world. And certainly, it is not meant to replace those special accrediting organisations which offer 
their work at a cost to assess and establish quality standards in the services provided by health institutions 
– hospitals, clinics or centres public or private. 
Indeed, TIF strongly encourages competent authorities to adopt such a methodology where and when 
possible, especially since the quality of services and care is directly related to survival and quality of life 
[30].  
TIF through this basic programme outlined above, mainly, aims to initiate an effort towards raising 
awareness on the value of MDC and Reference Centres in improving survival and quality of life of patients 
with these disorders as has been documented in a few countries (Figures 1-3). It aims to offer a simpler 
methodology as a first step to support the upgrading of services provided by treating centres particularly, 
but not only, of the developing economies by introducing the practice of MDC and by better 
acknowledging the value of the idea of pooling knowledge and experience and sharing best practices 
through the existence of Reference/Expert Centres. 
THE KEY GOALS OF THIS PROGRAMME ARE TO: 
✓ Provide authoritative scientific opinions and advice on key topics in clinical management 
including accurate diagnostic techniques, blood safety, correct iron monitoring and dealing with 
complications through a multidisciplinary approach in order to achieve continuous 
improvement within the healthcare delivery system for haemoglobinopathies worldwide; 
✓ Provide a mechanism for internal and external peer evaluation towards excellence and ensure 
each centre’s accountability for the service they provide to thalassaemia patients; 
✓ Establish an international network of reference centres for the worldwide delivery of quality 
healthcare services for haemoglobinopathies; 
✓ Improve patient and programme safety in all activities and initiatives; 
✓ Facilitate all patients’ access to expert management and contribute to the reduction of 
inequalities in the care that patients receive; 
✓ Provide educational and training outlets for the centre’s staff to stimulate the organisation’s 
quality improvement efforts. Secondary centres will have the opportunity to send staff for 
training and continuing medical education at certified centres; 
✓ Provide networking opportunities with other regional and international treating centres and 
benefit from staff training and tele-consultation to enable stakeholders to promote quality 
services from central level (government); 
✓ Enhance community confidence in thalassaemia care in all affected countries. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
211 
 
Figure 1. Survival by 10-year birth cohort, all UK [31] 
 
 
Figure 2. Survival estimates of thalassaemia major patients at UCLH 2 [Porter & Davis et al., 2002] 
 
 
 
 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
212 
Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier overall survival curves of patients referred to specialised centres (IC) versus patients referred 
to nonspecialised centres (OC). Log-rank P-value <0.0001; hazard ratio of OC versus IC adjusted for sex (Cox model): 
18.1, 95% confidence int 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
213 
How United Kingdom Haemoglobinopathy Services Work 
National Haemoglobinopathy Panel (NHP) 
• 
Ensure the provision of a nationally consistent approach to care as envisaged by the Clinical Reference 
Group and approved by commissioners 
• 
Coordinate the actions taken as Specialist Hospital Treatment Centres (SHTs) and Haemoglobinopathy 
Treatment Centres (HCCs) levels to deliver access to specialist oversight and to reduce unwarranted 
variation 
• 
Provide SHT and HCC access to national expert clinical opinion regarding the treatment of complex 
patients 
• 
Support the introduction of commissioned innovative therapies by acting as a national panel to 
consider individual patients most able to benefit and to enable patients to have access to these 
therapies, irrespective of where they live 
• 
Monthly video Clinical Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT) for complex cases 
• 
Email MDT for emergency cases requiring additional specialist input 
• 
Recommendation of high-cost therapies 
• 
Ensure equity of service of provision 
 
 
 
HCC 
SHT 
LHT 
Haemoglobinopathy 
Coordinating 
Centres 
(HCC) 
•
Designated by the NHS to provide 
specialist care for haemoglobinopathies, 
including Sickle Cell Disease (SCD), 
thalassaemia and other rare anaemias 
•
Offer paediatric and/or adult care 
•
May be predominantly for thalassaemia or 
SCD 
Specialist Hospital Treatment Centres (SHT) 
•
Designated by the NHS to provide 
specialist care in local hospitals that do not 
have specialist designation but are linked 
to a specialist centre 
•
Patients based in these centres must have 
a comprehensive annual review at the 
SHTs 
Local Hospital Treatment Centres (LHT) 
•
No specialist designation 
•
Linked to a specialist centre 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
214 
How Italian Haemoglobinopathy Services Work 
National Coordination Committee 
• 
To act as a link between the Ministry, the Regions and the Health Centres 
• 
To verify the homogeneous distribution of Care Centres throughout the country, reporting any 
deficiencies 
• 
To review and update the process and efficiency indicators 
• 
To verify the compliance of the Health Authorities and the Hospitals of the treatment centres 
• 
To coordinate training and information initiatives 
• 
To start the procedures for the accreditation of centres, according to European criteria (ERNs) and with 
models already implemented in other countries 
• 
To propose agreements between regions with the aim of standardizing patient management at 
national level through the creation of supra-regional services: e.g. provision of remote expertise 
 
 
 
Regional or Interregional Reference Centres 
• 
Regional Reference Centres are designated 
by the Regions based on their level of care 
and scientific excellence, competence and 
experience 
• 
The Regional Reference Centres are tasked 
with the provision of second and third level 
services, the coordination of regional 
network activities, the development of 
relationships between Network authorities 
for the dissemination and integration of 
diagnostic and therapeutic protocols 
• 
It is the exclusive duty of the centre to inform 
the patient, at the end of the procedure, 
about the results of the diagnosis for the 
purpose 
of 
sectoral 
consultation, 
management 
and 
epidemiological 
management 
• 
Interregional Centres can be established at 
the proposal of the National Coordination 
Committee and at the initiative of two 
and/or more Regions, through special 
agreements 
for 
the 
assignment 
of 
supraregional tasks to one or more Regional 
Reference Centres with the aim of saving 
resources, better quality of services and 
prevention actions 
Thalassaemia and other Haemoglobinopathies Centres 
• 
Thalassaemia and Haemoglobinopathy Centres are designated by the Regions based on their level of 
competence and experience and where the epidemiological distribution of the diseases dictates the need of 
their operation 
• 
The Centres have a duty to provide quality assistance to patients and to cooperate with the Regional or 
Interregional Centre and with the National Network in all activities of epidemiological, therapeutic and 
research importance as well as in those of education and information 
• 
It is the sole duty of the centre to inform the patient at the end of the procedure of the results of the 
diagnosis, for purposes of consulting, management and epidemiological management 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
215 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Patients globally are indeed faced with huge unmet needs both in basic medical care and to an even larger 
extend with regards to accessing MDC and expert reviewing of their clinical status in Reference Centres with 
accumulated expertise. Both of these latter elements are unfortunately largely missing, and according to TIF’s 
records of over 35 years’ work at country level, in over 60 countries across the world, such components are 
provided to less than 2% of the patients globally, constituting a severe violation of their rights both as humans 
and as patients. 
It is hoped that the work of every country around the world towards promoting the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals 2030 (United Nations, 2021) [33] and the work of the WHO on disease specific but also many 
other relevant decisions, resolutions and programmes e.g. (WHO EB118.R1 on Thalassaemia & other 
Hemoglobinopathies (WHO, 2006b) [34] and Resolution WHA59.20 on sickle cell anaemia (WHO, 2006a) [35], 
blood and patient safety, just to name a few key ones related to these disorders will contribute towards 
achieving significant progress in the prevention and management of these disorders and will ‘allow’ them to 
further improve and introduce more specialised care, as described in this chapter. 
Health and care services are becoming increasingly strained and health care authorities worldwide need to 
invest in integrated care particularly in the case of chronic, complex diseases such as the haemoglobin 
disorders, to first and above all deliver higher quality services for the patients while at the same time containing 
costs. Unfortunately, existing evidence of the cost-effectiveness of integrated care is limited particularly with 
regards to haemoglobin disorders. Future economic evaluation should target methodological issues to aid 
policy decisions with more robust evidence based on reliable, nationwide date (Aguilar Martinez et al., 2014) 
[1]. TIF has made an effort in the context of this Global Review to include a cost of disease generic model (see 
relevant chapter) to support decision makers in making a country specific estimation of the cost of care of 
patients with TDT. 
 
 
 
It is also hoped that the 4th edition of TIF’s Guidelines for the Management of Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassaemia, slated for publication, and the work of TIF over 35 years of its existence, greatly 
supported by the WHO, and through its collaboration with the UN, the United Nations Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC), the EC/EU, a large group of medical and scientific bodies and experts, and 
very importantly by the patients and families themselves, at national and international level, will all 
contribute to the efforts of every country in providing a better future and ensuring more equality for 
patients with thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders. 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
216 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Eleftheriou A, author. Angastiniotis M, 
Taher A, Alassaf A, Porter J, editors. 
Multidisciplinary Care and Reference 
Centres 
in 
addressing 
haemoglobin 
disorders. In: Cappellini MD, Farmakis D, 
Porter J, Taher A, editors. 2021 Guidelines: 
For the Management of Transfusion 
Dependent 
Thalassaemia 
(TDT) 
[Internet]. 4th ed. Nicosia (Cyprus): 
Thalassaemia International Federation; 
2023. CHAPTER 20. PMID: 38683922. 
2. 
Aguilar Martinez, P., Angastiniotis, M., 
Eleftheriou, A., Gulbis, B., et al. (2014) 
Haemoglobinopathies in Europe: health & 
migration policy perspectives. Orphanet 
Journal of Rare Diseases. [Online] 9, 97. 
Available from: doi:10.1186/1750-1172-9-
97. 
3. 
Allen 
D, Gillen 
E, 
Rixson 
L. The 
Effectiveness of Integrated Care Pathways 
for Adults and Children in Health Care 
Settings: A Systematic Review. JBI Libr 
Syst 
Rev. 
2009;7(3):80-129. 
doi: 
10.11124/01938924-200907030-00001. 
4. 
Rocks S, Berntson D, Gil-Salmerón A, 
Kadu M, Ehrenberg N, Stein V, Tsiachristas 
A. Cost and effects of integrated care: a 
systematic literature review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Health Econ. 2020 
Nov;21(8):1211-1221. doi: 10.1007/s10198-
020-01217-5. 
5. 
Angastiniotis, M.; Eleftheriou, A.; Naveed, 
M.; Assaf, A.A.; Polynikis, A.; Soteriades, 
E.S.; Farmakis, D. TIF Standards for 
Haemoglobinopathy Reference Centres. 
Thalass. 
Rep. 
2023, 
13, 
10-20. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/thalassrep130100
02 
6. 
Eleftheriou A, author. Angastiniotis M, 
Taher A, Alassaf A, Porter J, editors. 
Multidisciplinary Care and Reference 
Centres 
in 
addressing 
haemoglobin 
disorders. In: Cappellini MD, Farmakis D, 
Porter J, Taher A, editors. 2021 Guidelines: 
For the Management of Transfusion 
Dependent 
Thalassaemia 
(TDT) 
[Internet]. 4th ed. Nicosia (Cyprus): 
Thalassaemia International Federation; 
2023. CHAPTER 20. PMID: 38683922. 
7. 
Corrons, J.-L.V., Pereira, M. del M.M., 
Romeo-Casabona, C., Nicolás, P., et al. 
(2014) Recommendations for centres of 
expertise in rare anaemias. The ENERCA 
White 
Book. 
Thalassemia 
Reports. 
[Online] 4 (47878), 86–90. Available from: 
doi:https://doi.org/10.4081/thal.2014.487
8. 
8. 
EUCERD (2011) Recommendations on 
quality criteria for centres of expertise for 
rare diseases in Member States. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.eucerd.eu/?page_id=13. 
9. 
Abu Shosha GM, Al-Kalaldeh M, Shoqirat 
N. Nurses' experiences of psychosocial 
care needs of children with thalassaemia 
and 
their 
families 
in 
Jordan: 
A 
phenomenological study. Nurs Open. 
2022 
Nov;9(6):2858-2866. 
doi: 
10.1002/nop2.992 
10. 
Al-Marzouki AF, Alrefaie NI, Aljohani NA, 
Alandanusi RA, Alghamdi AA, Radhwi OO. 
The Prevalence of Depression and Anxiety 
Among Sickle Cell Disease Patients in King 
Abdulaziz University Hospital. Cureus. 
2021 
Sep 
29;13(9):e18374. 
doi: 
10.7759/cureus.18374 
11. 
Setiawan H, Firmansyah A, Richard SD. 
The role of nurses to control beta 
thalassemia disease in Indonesia: A 
perspective. J Taibah Univ Med Sci. 2023 
Feb 
20;18(5):964-966. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jtumed.2023.02.007. 
12. 
Habbash F, Al-Bati W, Al-Hashim H, 
Aldossari M, Alali A, Alalyani K, Al-
Ebrahim Z, Hamed N, Eraqe S, Binayfan Z, 
Al 
Marri 
A, 
Aljaber 
T. 
Endocrine 
Complications 
and 
the 
Effect 
of 
Compliance with Chelation Therapy in 
Patients with Beta Thalassemia Major in 
Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia. J Blood 
Med. 
2022;13:763-774 
https://doi.org/10.2147/JBM.S386594 
13. 
Venou TM, 
Barmpageorgopoulou 
F, 
Peppa M, Vlachaki E. Endocrinopathies in 
beta thalassemia: a narrative review. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
217 
Hormones (Athens). 2024 Jun;23(2):205-
216. doi: 10.1007/s42000-023-00515-w. 
14. 
Atmakusuma 
TD, 
Tenggara 
JB. 
Correlation of Transferrin Saturation and 
Serum Ferritin with Bone Mass Density in 
Adult 
Transfusion 
Dependent 
Beta-
Thalassemia Patients. J Blood Med. 2021 
Sep 
9;12:827-832. 
doi: 
10.2147/JBM.S328547. 
15. 
Tantiworawit 
A, 
Kamolsripat 
T, 
Piriyakhuntorn P, Rattanathammethee T, 
Hantrakool 
S, 
Chai-Adisaksopha 
C, 
Rattarittamrong 
E, 
Norasetthada 
L, 
Fanhchaksai K, Charoenkwan P. Survival 
and causes of death in patients with alpha 
and 
beta-thalassemia 
in 
Northern 
Thailand. 
Ann 
Med. 
2024 
Dec;56(1):2338246. 
doi: 
10.1080/07853890.2024.2338246. 
16. 
Kattamis A, Voskaridou E, Delicou S, 
Klironomos E, Lafiatis I, Petropoulou F, 
Diamantidis MD, Lafioniatis S, Evliati L, 
Kapsali E, Karvounis-Marolachakis K, 
Timotheatou D, Deligianni C, Viktoratos P, 
Kourakli A. 
Real-world 
complication 
burden 
and 
disease 
management 
paradigms 
in 
transfusion-related 
β-
thalassaemia in Greece: Results from 
ULYSSES, 
an 
epidemiological, 
multicentre, retrospective cross-sectional 
study. EJHaem. 2023 May 23;4(3):569-581. 
doi: 10.1002/jha2.695. 
17. 
Tan JY, Yeo YH, Chan KH, Shaaban HS, 
Guron G. Causes of Death and Mortality 
Trends in Individuals with Thalassemia in 
the United States, 1999-2020. J Blood 
Med. 
2024 
Aug 
5;15:331-339. 
doi: 
10.2147/JBM.S470177. 
18. 
Wu JK, McVay K, Mahoney KM, Sayani FA, 
Roe AH, Cebert M. Experiences with 
healthcare navigation and bias among 
adult women with sickle cell disease: a 
qualitative study. Qual Life Res. 2024 Oct 
14. doi: 10.1007/s11136-024-03805-x. 
19. 
De Santis 
M. 
Integrated 
care 
for 
healthcare sustainability for patients 
living with rare diseases. Ann Ist Super 
Sanita. 2019 Jul-Sep;55(3):276-282. doi: 
10.4415/ANN_19_03_14. 
20. 
European Commission (2016) European 
Reference 
Networks. 
[Online]. 
25 
November 2016. Public Health - European 
Commission. 
Available 
from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/health/ern_en 
[Accessed: 15 February 2021]. 
21. 
European Parliament (2011) Directive 
2011/24/EU of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 9 March 2011 on the 
application of patients’ rights in cross-
border healthcare. Official Journal of the 
European Union. 21. 
22. 
EuroBloodNet 
(2021) 
EuroBloodNet. 
[Online]. 2021. EuroBloodNet. Available 
from: 
https://eurobloodnet.eu/ 
[Accessed:25 October 2024]. 
23. 
JCI Survey Process Guide for Ambulatory 
Care, 
4th 
Edition 
Site 
License. 
https://store.jointcommissioninternation
al.org/jci-survey-process-guide-for-
ambulatory-care-4th-edition/jci-survey-
process-guide-for-ambulatory-care-4th-
edition-site-license-english-/  
24. 
EUCERD Recommendations on Rare 
Disease European Reference Networks 
(RD 
ERNS) 
2013 
https://www.rd-
action.eu/eucerd/EUCERD_Recommenda
tions/ern_recos.pdf  
25. 
Six Domains of Healthcare Quality. 
Agency for Healthcare Research (AHRQ) 
Rockville, MD Content last reviewed 
December 
2022. 
https://www.ahrq.gov/talkingquality/mea
sures/six-domains.html 
26. 
Chakravorty S, Drasar E, Kaya B, Kesse-
Adu R, Velangi M, Wright J, Howard J. UK 
Haemoglobin Disorders Peer Review: A 
Quality 
Standards-based 
review 
programme for sickle cell disease and 
thalassaemia. Br J Haematol. 2024 
Feb;204(2):668-676. 
doi: 
10.1111/bjh.19114. 
27. 
Cappellini MD, Farmakis D, Porter J, Taher 
A, editors. 2021 Guidelines: For the 
Management of Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassaemia (TDT) [Internet]. 4th ed. 
Nicosia 
(Cyprus): 
Thalassaemia 
International Federation; 2023. PMID: 
38683909. 
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CARE AND REFERENCE CENTRES IN ADDRESSING HAEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS 
218 
28. 
Taher AT, Musallam KM, Cappellini MD. 
Guidelines for the management of non-
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassaemia. 
3rd 
edition. 
Nicosia 
(Cyprus): 
Thalassaemia International Federation; 
2023 
29. 
European guidelines for the certification 
of 
Haemophilia. 
EUTHANET 
2013. 
https://www.euhanet.org/docs/euhanet-
european_guidelines_for_the_certificatio
n_of_haemophilia_centres_2013.pdf  
30. 
Forni, G.L., Puntoni, M., Boeri, E., 
Terenzani, L., et al. (2009) The influence of 
treatment in specialized centers on 
survival of patients with thalassemia 
major. American Journal of Hematology. 
[Online] 84 (5), 317–318. Available from: 
doi:10.1002/ajh.21398. 
31. 
Modell, B., Khan, M. & Darlison, M. (2000) 
Survival in beta-thalassaemia major in the 
UK: data from the UK Thalassaemia 
Register. 
Lancet 
(London, 
England). 
[Online] 355 (9220), 2051–2052. Available 
from: doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(00)02357-
6. 
32. 
Porter JB, Davis BA. Monitoring chelation 
therapy to achieve optimal outcome in the 
treatment of thalassaemia. Best Pract Res 
Clin Haematol. 2002 Jun;15(2):329-68. 
PMID: 12401311. 
33. 
United 
Nations 
(2021) 
Sustainable 
Development Goals: 17 Goals to transform 
our world. [Online]. 2021. Sustainable 
Development Goals. Available 
from: 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopm
ent/sustainable-development-goals/ 
[Accessed: 15 February 2021]. 
34. 
EB118.R1 
Thalassaemia 
and 
other 
haemoglobinopathies 
https://www.emro.who.int/images/storie
s/ncd/documents/b118_r1-en1.pdf 
35. 
WHA59.20 
Sickle-cell 
anaemia 
https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/
WHA59/A59_R20-en.pdf 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
219 
 
 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
220 
8. SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA: 
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH 
FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., Antoniou E. & Eleftheriou A. 
 
ABSTRACT 
The social determinants of health are those factors that contribute to the health status and well-being of each 
individual, supporting social inclusion and integration: the lower an individual’s socio-economic position, the 
higher their risk of poor health is. To assess the level of social integration of people with thalassaemia, based on 
the social determinants of health, we have collected data through targeted literature reviews (2013-2023) and 
a global survey that was conducted between 2022-2023. Despite fragmented data, coming from specific regions 
of the world, it is evident that in countries where multidisciplinary care is provided free of charge, in the context 
of Universal Health Coverage, and combined with social benefits, patients have a better quality of life, in terms 
of ageing and access to education, the labour force, and family planning. Our study has also identified policy 
gaps with regard to the social inclusion of migrant populations and research gaps, especially with regard to the 
patients’ work- or education-life-treatment balance, and their access to psychological support, given that the 
mental health aspect has not yet been acknowledged enough by any country of the world. 
Keywords: social determinants of health; social inclusion; thalassaemia; haemoglobinopathies 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which started a global effort in 2000 to tackle the indignity of 
poverty, were succeeded by the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2012, which aimed at meeting urgent 
environmental, political and economic challenges facing our world, while leaving no one behind. As a call to 
action for all countries of the world, 17 SDGs and 169 associated targets were defined, to be reached by 2030.  
Despite all efforts to meet the SDGs, widening inequalities, public health threats, climate change, protracted 
conflicts, widespread hazards and environmental degradation, rapid urbanisation and the overconsumption of 
natural resources have driven systemic risks and instabilities to new and unprecedented levels, heavily affecting 
patients, one of the most vulnerable population groups. People with thalassaemia, in particular, depending on 
where they may live, are either still fighting for essential healthcare or highly specialised treatment, while 
having to deal, to a lesser or greater extent, with multiple external factors that determine their well-being and 
quality of life. 
This Chapter outlines and assesses these external factors that determine the level of inclusion [1] [UN 2016] 
and subsequent integration of patients into society, known as “Social Determinants of Health”. The social 
determinants of health are the social conditions in which people are born, grow, live, work and age that have a 
direct impact on their health and well-being, causing health inequities across countries and regions: the lower 
an individual’s socio-economic position, the higher their risk of poor health. Despite considerable attention to 
the problem of health inequities since 1978 [2], [3], [4], [5] [WHO 1978, 1986, 2011, 2021A], striking differences 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
221 
in health still exist among and within countries, linked to several social factors: education, income level, 
employment status, housing and environment, and systems of preventing and treating ill health [CSDH 2008]. 
Addressing the social determinants of health, both for vulnerable groups and the general population, is key to 
create equitable, economically productive, inclusive and healthy societies. Any action toward this direction, 
especially in low-resource settings, would contribute to the fight against poverty that is stifling development 
and is usually due to the exorbitant costs of healthcare, the reduction of premature deaths and the increase of 
life expectancy. 
 
 
 
Table 1. The Social Determinants of Health. Source: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation [Artiga et al. 2018] 
Economic 
Stability 
Neighbourhood 
and Physical 
Environment 
Education 
Food 
Community and 
Social Context 
Health Care 
System 
- 
Employment 
- 
Income 
- 
Expenses 
- 
Debt 
- 
Medical bills 
- 
Support 
- 
Housing 
- 
Transportation 
- 
Safety 
- 
Parks 
- 
Playgrounds 
- 
Walkability 
- 
ZIP code / 
geography 
- 
Literacy 
- 
Language 
- 
Early 
childhood 
education 
- 
Vocational 
training 
- 
Higher 
education 
- 
Hunger 
- 
Access 
to 
healthy 
options 
- 
Social 
integration 
- 
Support 
systems 
- 
Community 
engagement 
- 
Discrimination 
- 
Stress 
- 
Health 
coverage 
- 
Provider 
availability 
- 
Provider 
linguistic 
and cultural 
competency 
- 
Quality of 
care 
Health Outcomes 
Mortality, Morbidity, Life Expectancy, Health Care Expenditure, Health Status, Functional Limitation 
 
 
 
The concept of “Leaving No One Behind” alludes to social inclusion. The United Nations provide the 
following definitions [1][UN 2016]: 
 
• 
Social inclusion is defined by the United Nations as “the process of improving the terms of 
participation in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through enhancing 
opportunities, access to resources, voice and respect for rights”.  
• 
Social integration is the end-goal, i.e. “a society for all, in which every individual, each with rights 
and responsibilities has an active role to play”. 
• 
Social cohesion follows social integration and is defined as “the absence of fractures or divisions 
within society and the ability to manage such divisions. A cohesive society creates a sense of 
belonging, promotes trust, fights exclusion and marginalization and offers its members the 
opportunity of upward mobility”. 
• 
Social protection is the vehicle to achieve social integration and subsequently cohesion, taking the 
form of social benefits addressed to vulnerable groups. 
• 
Social determinants of health are a number of factors (social, economic, environmental) that 
contribute to the health status and well-being of each person, supporting social inclusion and 
subsequent integration. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
222 
Despite the global consensus for action across sectors to adopt a “Health in all Policies” approach and reduce 
health inequities, set out in a dedicated Resolution of the World Health Assembly (WHA62.14) [6] [WHO 2009], 
no significant progress has been made in the majority of countries. The lack of access to medically necessary 
health care for thalassaemia, as described in previous chapters, still has significant social and economic 
repercussions, which remain unmet, often forcing patients into poverty and out of the workforce. 
In many countries, out-of-pocket expenditure for access to essential health care services forces people to 
choose between paying for care and paying for other family and business necessities, reaching the catastrophic 
levels of more than 40% of household income net of subsistence [ILO 2020] and the unavoidable increase of 
mortality rates amongst the affected communities. 
In this context, social protection or security, in the form of state social benefits, is necessary to alleviate the 
burden caused by ill health and reduce the indirect costs of disease and disability, such as lost years of income 
due to short- and long-term disability, care of family members, lower productivity, and the impaired education 
and social development of children [ILO 2008, 2020 and 2021]. Defined as “all measures providing benefits in 
cash or in kind to guarantee income security and access to health care” [UN 2018], social health protection is 
considered as key to achieve universal health coverage and social justice and inclusion for people with 
thalassaemia.  
The right to social security and protection is recognised in numerous human rights instruments, including the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Article 22) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (Article 9) and is crucial for guaranteeing a life in dignity. As a fundamental human right, social 
security is a potent tool to combat discrimination and an essential instrument for reducing poverty and 
promoting social inclusion. It aims to provide income security and support at every stage of life for everyone, 
with particular attention to the most marginalised. 
An effective social health protection system provides universal access to needed health care and financial 
protection that is i) accessible to cover all persons, especially those belonging to the most disadvantaged and 
marginalized groups, without discrimination; ii) available under domestic law to ensure that benefits are 
effectively administered and supervised; iii) adequate so that everyone may realise his or her rights to family 
protection and assistance, a reasonable standard of living and access to health care; and iv) affordable to reduce 
inequalities. 
Considering the above, this Chapter aims to present how the social determinants of health currently affect the 
global thalassaemia community and identify the social protection schemes currently available to people with 
thalassaemia with the aim to highlight certain areas of concern for policy consideration, based on the four 
aforementioned pillars. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
Targeted Literature Review – Social Integration and Thalassaemia 
A first targeted literature review was conducted to update the Global Thalassaemia Review 2022 findings and 
identify those social determinants of health that affect the thalassaemia community. Articles with open access 
and drafted in English were selected. Eighty-eight articles have been reviewed, published between 2013 and 
2023 and coming from all six WHO regions. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
223 
 
Figure 1. Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia, Publications per Country (2013-2023) 
 
 
Figure 2. Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia, Publications per WHO Region (2013-2023) 
14
13
11
9
8
4
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia
Publications per Country (2013-2023)
Number of Publications
39
25
8
8
6
2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
EMR
SEAR
EUR
GLOBAL
WPR
AMR
Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia Publications per WHO Region 
(2013-2023)
Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia Publications per WHO Region (2013-2023)
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
224 
 
Figure 3. Origin of Publications (Social Integration of People Living with Thalassaemia, 2021 – 2023) 
Fourteen (14) articles focus on people with thalassaemia living in Pakistan, 13 on Iran, 11 on India and 9 on 
Indonesia. Other publications come from Turkey (4), Malaysia and Palestine (3 per country), Bangladesh, China, 
Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, United Arab Emirates, United States (2 per country), Australia, Cyprus, 
Greece, Italy, Papua New Guinea, Syria, United Kingdom (1 per country). Eight publications provide a global 
image of the social integration of people living with thalassaemia. Most reviewed articles were published in the 
Eastern Mediterranean and South-East Asian regions that host the majority of the global thalassaemia 
population (see Chapter 1 on epidemiology). 
A steady increase in the number of publications was noted between 2019 and 2023. This correlates with the 
emergence, spread and containment of the Covid-19 pandemic and the rise of mental health issues that heavily 
affected both patients and their caregivers. (https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-
use/mental-health-and-covid-19)  
 
 
Figure 4. Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia, Publications per Year (2013-2023) 
1
4
5
2
5
9
6
10
12
15
19
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia, Publications per Year (2013-2023)
Number of Publications
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
225 
 
Targeted literature review findings were then compared to the findings of the TIF Global Surveys 2022-2023 
(“Latest Survey”) and 2020-2021 (“Past Survey”) and are presented further below. 
Targeted Literature Review – Social Benefits and Thalassaemia 
A second targeted literature review aimed at identifying the current provision of social and disability benefits 
for patients with haemoglobin disorders (thalassaemia and sickle cell disease) in 38 countries. Country selection 
was based on three criteria: i) prevalence of haemoglobin disorders; ii) presence of a patient association 
(Member of TIF); and iii) availability of data. Research work was thus organised in three phases, starting from a 
more specific research framework focusing on a smaller population (i.e., people with haemoglobin disorders) 
and ending with a more general one (i.e., people with disabilities). Phase 1 was designed to identify disease-
specific allowances and yielded a very limited number of results, mainly focusing on four countries: Cyprus, 
Greece, Italy and India. Phase 2 had a slightly broader scope, focusing on the identification of benefits for 
people with haematological diseases, congenital diseases, non-communicable diseases or rare diseases, an 
umbrella group in which people with thalassaemia are usually included. Results were even less. We then 
proceeded to Phase 3, based on the fact that people with haemoglobin disorders often present a number of 
hidden or invisible or silent disabilities, linked to their age and progression of the disease, that are not 
immediately apparent and include but are not limited to chronic pain, sight or hearing impairments, diabetes, 
osteoporosis, endocrine or cardiac complications and functionality challenges. This more general approach to 
the subject in question allowed us to clarify the perception of different countries on disability and how they 
support affected people on their daily struggle. Key sources used were the publicly available database of the 
International Social Security Association that gathers information directly from the Ministries of Social Affairs 
of more than 180 countries and presents data in a concise manner, as well the World Social Protection Report 
(2017-2019) of the International Labor Organization. 
 
TIF GLOBAL SURVEY 2022-2023 
Until September 2023, TIF received 2071 responses, in both paper and electronic format, from patients and 
parents living in 48 countries of the world. Most responses (54.76%) came from lower-middle income countries 
of the Eastern Mediterranean and South-East Asia regions, as is the case of literature review articles. 
 
Figure 5. TIF Survey 2022-2023, Study Population (By World Bank Classification 
80
1134
518
311
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Study Population (By World Bank Classification)
Number of Responses
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
226 
 
Figure 6. TIF Survey 2022-2023, Study Population (By WHO Region) 
 
 
Figure 7. TIF Global Survey 2022 – 2023 respondents 
The European region had the highest mean age of respondents (41.1 years old) and the South-East Asia region 
the lowest (21.4 years old). 1452 (70.11%) patients and 574 parents (27.72%) responded overall, more of whom 
were women (1075 – 51.9%) than men (868 – 41.91%). Questions focused, inter alia, on the status of 
employment, relationship status, out-of-pocket expenses, accessibility of treatment, loss of education or work 
due to treatment, factors that contribute to the patients’ quality of life. 
 
10
12
1111
208
679
23
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
AFR
AMR
EMR
EUR
SEAR
WPR
Number of Responses
Number of Responses
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
227 
FINDINGS 
Targeted Literature Review (Social Integration and Thalassaemia) 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia Topics (2013-2023) 
The above topics in focus fall under the social determinants of health (i.e., Economic Stability, Neighbourhood 
and Physical Environment, Education, Food, Community and Social Context, Healthcare System), as defined by 
the World Health Organisation. (https://www.who.int/health-topics/social-determinants-of-health#tab=tab_1) 
55
32
26
24
22
21
13
10
8
8
1
1
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Social Integration of People with Thalassaemia Topics (2013-2023)
Number of Publications
Overview 
 
All publications focus on different psychosocial issues related to thalassaemia. Mental health issues are 
reported in the majority of articles (55 – 62.5%), while about one third of the reviewed publications shed 
light onto the importance of support systems, especially caregivers (e.g., parents, families, nurses). Four 
themes are also frequently discussed by the research community: 
 
i. 
the importance of disease-specific education for the social integration of patients 
ii. 
the correlation between patient’s quality of care and quality of life 
iii. 
the financial burden of healthcare and its negative impact on the social integration and quality 
of life of patients 
iv. 
social integration as a multi-factorial challenge for people with thalassaemia. 
 
Thirteen authors refer to the limited availability of services, especially psychological support, while ten 
note that people with thalassaemia are socially marginalised. Community engagement through 
awareness-raising campaigns is another method for social integration, frequently cited in literature. 
Transportation from and to hospitals, access to healthy options and provider competency are also 
reported in the reviewed documents. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
228 
African Region 
No publication from the region has been identified. 
 
Region of the Americas 
Topics of interest vary according to region, and the different needs of the patient community. Publications from 
the region of the Americas mainly focus on the financial burden of the disease for patients and their families 
and on the added value of social benefits for the social inclusion and integration of people with thalassaemia. 
This focus indicates that further social support is needed in the region for patients to have access to appropriate 
care. 
Table 2. AMR Publications 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Abdelaziz et al. 2023 
United States 
Afzal et al. 2023 
United States 
 
Eastern Mediterranean Region 
The Eastern Mediterranean region focuses on the financial burden of the disease, as well, highlighting the 
challenges of families, as caregivers and the affordability of essential treatment and testing. The loss of 
productivity at work due to absenteeism is repeatedly mentioned in literature, as well, indicating the need to 
raise community awareness and strengthen support systems, whether community-based or national. 
Table 3. EMR Publications 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Al Sabbah et al. 2017 
Egypt 
Alam et al. 2021 
Pakistan 
AlHamawi et al. 2023 
Palestine 
Ali Syed et al. 2020 
Jordan 
Al-sayed et al. 2022 
Saudi Arabia 
Alshamsi et al. 2021 
Iraq 
Amid et al. 2015 
UAE 
Angastiniotis et al. 2022 
Pakistan 
Bagul et al. 2023 
Iran 
Batool et al. 2022 
Pakistan 
Behdani et al. 2015 
Jordan 
Bibi et al. 2021 
Iran 
Chattoo et al. 2014 
Iran 
Dini et al. 2020 
Pakistan 
Ghada 2016 
Pakistan 
Ghorbanpoor et al. 2020 
Pakistan 
Greco et al. 2022 
Syria 
Greco et al. 2022 (2) 
Iran 
Heidari et al. 2020 
Palestine 
Henny et al. 2017 
Iran 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
229 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Hossain et al. 2023 
Iran 
Imtiaz et al. 2020 
Iran 
Irsa et al. 2022 
Iraq 
Ishfaq et al. 2018 
Iran 
Isler et al. 2018 
Pakistan 
Jajhara et al. 2021 
Iran 
Jeesh et al. 2018 
Egypt 
John et al. 2013 
Saudi Arabia 
Karakul et al. 2022 
Pakistan 
Khodashenas et al. 2021 
Pakistan 
Kohlbry et al. 2023 
Palestine 
Kumar et al. 2018 
Pakistan 
Kumaravel et al. 2016 
Pakistan 
Lintang et al. 2020 
UAE 
Maheri et al. 2018 
Iran 
Mahnoudi et al. 2019 
Pakistan 
Mardhiyah et al. 2022 
Pakistan 
Mardhiyah et al. 2023 
Iran 
 
European Region 
Researchers in the European region have raised the alarm on the mental health state of patients and the 
availability of multidisciplinary care at their treatment centres. What remains challenging in some countries is 
access to appropriate care by patients living in rural or remote areas and in most countries the loss of a 
significant number of days from school and work. It is evident that patients seek education-work-life-treatment 
balance. 
Table 4. EUR Publications 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Maryam et al. 2019 
Cyprus 
Mathhiesson et al. 2023 
UK 
Mettananda et al. 2019 
Turkey 
Mettananda et al. 2021 
Greece 
Mikael et al. 2018 
Turkey 
Naderi et al. 2021 
Italy 
Nagiria et al. 2021 
Turkey 
Nargis et al. 2023 
Turkey 
 
Southeast Asia Region 
People with thalassaemia living in the South-East Asia region that hosts the majority of the global thalassaemia 
population still face major challenges in their daily lives. Literature indicates that patients and their families are 
financially drained, as universal health coverage is not available in the vast majority of countries. This, combined 
with the loss of days from school and work, heavily affects their quality of life. Researchers thus stress the 
importance of the quality of care and explain why, combined with social support, may improve the overall well-
being of the patient community. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
230 
Table 5. SEAR Publications 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Punaglom et al. 2019 
Bangladesh 
Ramadan et al. 2022 
Indonesia 
Rashid et al. 2020 
Indonesia 
Raza et al. 2015 
Bangladesh 
Rubab et al. 2023 
India 
Sahu et al. 2023 
India 
Saldanha et al. 2015 
India 
Saqlain et al. 2023 
Indonesia 
Sarhan et al. 2022 
Indonesia 
Septyana et al. 2019 
Indonesia 
Sevinç 2023 
Sri Lanka 
Sevinç 2022 
Sri Lanka 
Shafi et al. 2021 
India 
Siddiqui et al. 2014 
Malaysia 
US Social Security Administration 2023 
India 
Sodani 2017 
Indonesia 
Suaan et al. 2023 
India 
Taheri et al. 2020 
India 
Thiyagarajan et al. 2019 
Indonesia 
Uchil et al. 2023 
India 
Ul Hassan et al. 2020 
India 
Venty et al. 2018 
India 
Wangi et al. 2023 
Indonesia 
Yousuf et al. 2022 
Indonesia 
 
Western Pacific Region 
Researchers living in the Western Pacific region reports that mostly patients and their families bear the financial 
burden of treatment, noting that adherence to treatment is also an issue to be addressed. There is a special 
interest in education and a discussion on how disease-specific literacy may the overall quality of life of patients. 
Table 6. WPR Publications 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Zaheer et al. 2015 
Australia 
Zakiyah et al. 2018 
Papua New Guinea 
Zeykani et al. 2018 
Malaysia 
Zhang et al. 2023 
China 
Zhen et al. 2023 
China 
 
The mixed picture, briefly described above, shows that health inequalities exist within and across countries and 
regions of the world. It is evident, however, that in the last years and in all regions, the COVID-19 pandemic and 
subsequent geopolitical crises have exacerbated existing inequalities and further stressed the need to provide 
patients with social protection. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
231 
Abbreviation of Article 
Country 
Nasiri et al. 2014 
Review (Global) 
Othman et al. 2022 
Review (Global) 
Palanisamy et al. 2017 
Review (Global) 
Phang et al. 2021 
Review (Global) 
Platania et al. 2017 
Review (Global) 
Prajapati et al. 2021 
Review (Global) 
Pranandita et al. 2021 
Review (Global) 
 
Targeted Literature Review (Social Benefits and Thalassaemia) 
In the context of this study, we perceive social benefits as essential interventions to address the social 
determinants of health in each country and ensure a better quality of life for patients. (Hakeem, G.L.A., Mousa, 
S.O., Moustafa, A.N. et al. Health-related quality of life in pediatric and adolescent patients with transfusion-
dependent ß-thalassemia in upper Egypt (single center study). Health Qual Life Outcomes 16, 59 (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-018-0893-z) 
People with haemoglobin disorders are entitled to three categories of benefits: i) General Population Benefits, 
i.e., benefits on their status as citizens, in the context of the contributory social insurance schemes of each 
country (child and family, maternity, sickness, unemployment, employment injury, survivors, old age, invalidity 
and disability benefits); ii) Disability Benefits, i.e., benefits on their status as disabled persons, either 
contributory (under the social security legislation) or non-contributory (under the disability legislation), 
provided in the context of the disability assessment policy in place and if patients are deemed eligible; and iii) 
Disease-specific Benefits, i.e., benefits on their status as people with haemoglobin disorders, either 
contributory (under the social security legislation) or non-contributory (under the disability legislation), in the 
context of disease-specific policies in place. 
 
OVERVIEW 
General Population Benefits 
While not all countries globally have ratified the social security conventions of the International Labour 
Organization, they all have at least one social protection programme or scheme anchored in national 
legislation, either contributory or non-contributory. Contributory programmes provide for social insurance 
benefits, addressed to employed or self-employed persons, based on their level of contributions to one or more 
dedicated national funds. These may include benefits or quotas to support children and families, education, 
maternity, sickness, unemployment, old age, invalidity or disability caused at work. Non-contributory 
programmes are rarer and addressed to people who are unable to work for various reasons and often live in 
poverty, not being able to cover housing, subsistence, education or healthcare costs. 
 
 
Based on our findings, inequities do exist between countries and regions, as high-income countries have 
more robust and inclusive social security systems, while low-resource countries focus on essential 
provisions, mostly linked to old age. This leaves the social determinants of health unaddressed to a large 
extent in most countries with high prevalence in thalassaemia, forcing patients to enter into poverty and 
limiting their access to appropriate health and other care. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
232 
Disability Benefits 
Disability benefits are granted, fully or partially, under either the social security or disability laws, to those who 
fulfil the national disability assessment criteria, varying significantly between high, medium and low resource 
countries (World Bank Group (2015). Assessing Disability in Working Age Population: A Paradigm Shift from 
Impairment 
and 
Functional 
Limitation 
to 
the 
Disability 
Approach, 
at: 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/272851468164970738/pdf/Disability-Assessment-Report-June-
18-2015.pdf).  In high-income countries, disability assessment follows the World Health Organization’s 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), which was approved by all WHO member 
states in 2002. A mixed method is adopted that takes into account the level of impairment, the functional 
capacity and the level of disability (visible and invisible) of patients. Most medium-income countries perceive 
disability as physical impairment (e.g., Argentina, India, China). Low-income countries (e.g., Bangladesh, 
Cambodia, Nepal, Republic of Congo), have either not adopted a disability definition or follow informal 
procedures for disability assessment, based on medical reports (International Social Security Association – 
Country Profiles (2019) at https://ww1.issa.int/country-profiles). 
 
Our findings indicate that the vast majority of countries cover the needs of disabled persons through the 
national social security programmes or schemes and have thus not adopted a national legislation dedicated to 
disability. This explains why the vast majority of countries do not provide or provide very confined non-
contributory benefits to disabled persons, creating inequities and not supporting the social determinants of 
health. 
 
Disease-specific Benefits 
Disease-specific benefits addressed to people with thalassaemia are provided in a limited number of countries 
(Cyprus, Greece, Italy, India, United Arab Emirates), where disease-specific policies exist under the existing 
social insurance or disability laws. 
 
The table in Annex II summarises our findings, presenting data collected for 38 countries worldwide regarding 
available benefits. 
 
African Region 
Countries of the region lag behind the implementation of social policies in support of patients and their families. 
No disease-specific benefits are available, while disability benefits are linked to the social insurance 
contributory schemes in each country. 
 
Region of the Americas 
While most countries of the region provide both general population and disability benefits, no disease-specific 
benefits are available.  
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
233 
Eastern Mediterranean Region 
There is vast heterogeneity within the region with regard to the provision of social benefits, which is generally 
considered limited. Only the United Arab Emirates provide limited disease-specific benefits to people with 
thalassaemia and their families: 
 
 
 
European Region 
While all countries have ratified the ILO Social Security Conventions and provide general population and 
disability benefits, a heterogeneity is noted in the level of implementation and effectiveness of these measures. 
Disease-specific benefits are available in Cyprus, Greece and Italy that showcase the highest level of social 
integration for people with thalassaemia. More specifically: 
 
 
 
 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: In the United Arab Emirates, people with thalassaemia, Emirati nationals 
(irrespective of being patients or not) receive a monthly allowance from the Ministry of Community 
Development that varies between $1,500–$2,000 (if patients are under the age of 18) and $3,000–$5,000 
(if patients are over the age of 18). They also receive support from the H.H Sheikh Sultan Bin Khalifa Al 
Nahyan Humanitarian & Scientific Foundation to either join the national bone marrow transplant 
programme, have access to job-specific training or find employment. 
CYPRUS: In Cyprus, people with thalassaemia patients are not considered disabled persons but may apply 
for a disability assessment if they wish so. There is a number of disease-specific state social benefits 
provided though, including a monthly allowance of €75–€150 for their transport to and from the 
thalassaemia centres, depending on their place of residence, a municipal tax reduction of 40%–50% 
(regarding waste collection), facilitation of employment in the public sector and access to public 
universities in the context of the disability law (10% of available positions must be taken from people from 
all disabilities groups). Patients may also participate for free in sports classes provided by the Cyprus Sports 
Organization 
GREECE: In Greece, disease-specific social benefits include the annual provision of 22 leave days for 
patients and their parents for blood transfusions, the coverage of transport expenses for patients that live 
far from their treating centres, a monthly allowance as financial support, the right to full retirement after 
15 years of employment, facilitated access (by quotas) to higher education and employment. People with 
a 67% disability can claim a disability pension after 5 years of employment and are entitled to tax 
exemption for the purchase of a car. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
234 
 
 
South-East Asia Region 
While there are limitations to the provision of social benefits and low rates of implementation of social 
legislation based on the ILO Conventions, India is the only country in the region that has passed legislation on 
disability that includes people with thalassaemia. More specifically: 
 
 
 
Western Pacific Region 
This is a two-speed region, given that countries such as Australia and China have general population benefits 
available, while Cambodia has no such policy in place. 
 
ITALY: In Italy, social benefits for people with thalassaemia are granted either pursuant to specific disease-
specific legislation or to provisions pertaining to people with disabilities, if patients undergo a disability 
assessment. Under the Economic Law of 2002, article 39, DPR 448/01, people with thalassaemia over 35 
years of age and with at least 10 years of social insurance contributions are entitled to a monthly allowance 
of c. €500. Other disease-specific benefits include the coverage of expenses for transportation for patients 
that live far from their treating centre (valid in Sicily), the provision of a bi-monthly financial support for 
all the people with permanent damages due to unsafe blood transfusions or mandatory vaccination 
(according to Law 210/92), a tax reduction of 19% (as per the personal income tax legislation), a 19% 
reimbursement of healthcare expenses, tax reductions for the purchase of cars, computers, phones and 
tablets and additional leave days of parents taking their children to thalassaemia centres. A number of 
benefits are also provided based on disability-specific legislation and assessment. More specifically, a 
disability pension is provided if disability exceeds 67%, while parents of children with disabilities receive 
an allowance only if their income is below a given threshold. Early retirement and easier access to higher 
education are also possible based on the outcome of the disability assessment. 
INDIA: In India, people with thalassaemia, sickle cell disease and haemophilia having a disability of 40% 
and above (“benchmark disability”) are considered disabled persons under the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act (RPWD) of 2016 and are provided with a Disability Certificate that gives them access to 
numerous social benefits. These include the provision of a long-term allowance (of at least 2 years) to 
unemployed people with thalassaemia registered with Special Employment Exchange, a care-giver 
allowance to address high support needs; a comprehensive insurance scheme, incentives to employers in 
the private sector to ensure that at least 5% of their workers are disabled persons, facilitation of access to 
higher education institutions by reserving 5% of available positions to persons with benchmark 
disabilities. Moreover, people with haemoglobin disorders are given priority in attendance and treatment, 
loans at concessional rates including that of microcredit, allotment of agricultural land and housing also 
at concessional rates, access to developmental schemes and programmes and financial aid if they are 
facing cardiac, liver, endocrine complications, bone disease/ deformity/ osteopenia or are affected with 
Hepatitis B, C and/or HIV. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
235 
SURVEY 
 
 
 
 
INDIA: In India, people with thalassaemia, sickle cell disease and haemophilia having a disability of 40% 
and above (“benchmark disability”) are considered disabled persons under the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act (RPWD) of 2016 and are provided with a Disability Certificate that gives them access to 
numerous social benefits. These include the provision of a long-term allowance (of at least 2 years) to 
unemployed people with thalassaemia registered with Special Employment Exchange, a care-giver 
allowance to address high support needs; a comprehensive insurance scheme, incentives to employers in 
the private sector to ensure that at least 5% of their workers are disabled persons, facilitation of access to 
higher education institutions by reserving 5% of available positions to persons with benchmark 
disabilities. Moreover, people with haemoglobin disorders are given priority in attendance and treatment, 
loans at concessional rates including that of microcredit, allotment of agricultural land and housing also 
at concessional rates, access to developmental schemes and programmes and financial aid if they are 
facing cardiac, liver, endocrine complications, bone disease/ deformity/ osteopenia or are affected with 
Hepatitis B, C and/or HIV. 
1. 
The majority of people with thalassaemia living in developing countries of the world are not 
employed and/or not in position to work due to disability. This is in sharp contrast with 
developed countries, where most patients are employed full-time and in retirement. 
2. Most people with thalassaemia living in developed countries are married. This indicates that 
patients living in these regions have a good quality of life, consider personal life and seek 
companionship.  
3. 
The level of education of people with thalassaemia greatly varies across the globe, with the 
region of the Americas hosting the most educated patients – holders of a master’s degree. This 
very fact highlights the correlation between the level of care and education, as well as the 
existing inequalities between regions of the world. 
4. Countries of the South-East Asian region lag behind with the implementation of universal health 
coverage policies as patients report out-of-pocket expenses for essential treatment, i.e. 
transfusion and chelation drugs. This indicates that access to healthcare is cumbersome for 
patients and their families, who already deal with an alarming increase in poverty rates. 
5. People with thalassaemia living in the European region benefit the most from access to state-
provided, free healthcare. 
6. Accessibility of treatment in the Eastern Mediterranean region is reportedly difficult, mostly due 
to the high cost of both travel to the treating centres and treatment.  
7. 
In all regions globally, patients lose more than 16 days annually in education/work. This signals 
a need for work-life-treatment balance, a need to sensitise the school and professional settings 
of thalassaemia and its impact on the daily lives of patients. 
 
Survey findings are presented in Annex I. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
236 
African Region 
In the African region, most people with thalassaemia are unemployed but looking for work (40%). A significant 
percentage (60%) is cohabiting with their partners, with marriage not being generally preferred (20%). About 
one third of survey respondents are high school graduates and another third hold a master’s degree. Two thirds 
of respondents pay out of pocket for chelation drugs, laboratory tests and MRI tests, and half of them for 
multidisciplinary care. In the absence of universal health coverage, the financial burden of treatment is mostly 
borne by patients themselves and their families (80%), is deemed difficult (60%) and costly (50%). Access to 
treatment centres is poor and patients lose more than 16 days per year from education and work. 
 
Region of the Americas 
Survey respondents living in the region of the Americas, namely Honduras, Trinidad and Tobago and the United 
States, report that they are employed, working full-time (58.30%), while a significant percentage of 16.70% is 
neither employed nor looking for work. With regard to relationship status, almost half of the respondents are 
married (41.70%), with an equal percentage being single. The cost of treatment is mainly borne by patients and 
their families (50%), even if access thereto is considered easy (41.70%). People with thalassaemia living in the 
region lose more than 16 days per year from education or work. 
 
Eastern Mediterranean Region 
More than one third (35%) of people with thalassaemia living in the region are unemployed and looking for 
work. With regard to their relationship status, about one third reports being married, while 11% of respondents 
are divorced, the highest rate globally. The education level amongst respondents varies, with 29.30% not being 
able to graduate from high school and 27.80% being university graduates. Out-of-pocket expenses are 
necessary for access to essential treatment and testing, borne by patients and their families (58.33%). The 
accessibility of treatment is deemed rather difficult, mostly because of the high cost of treatment (25.60%). 
 
European Region 
The majority of people with thalassaemia living in the region are employed, working full-time (40.90%) and 
married (46.60%). About one third of respondents are high school graduates and one third university graduates, 
holders of a bachelor’s degree. While healthcare is state-provided and free for patients, patients report that 
out-of-pocket expenses occur for MRI tests (14.42%) and multidisciplinary care (26.44%). Access to treatment 
is considered very easy (19.70%) and easy (38.00%). While 29.30% of respondents note that no day from 
education or work is lost for treatment purposes, 42.30% reports losing more than 16 days per year. 
 
South-East Asia Region 
More than half of the respondents living in the region (52.40%) are not employed nor looking for work and 
prefer cohabitation with their partners (42.00%). The majority of respondents report that they did not manage 
to graduate from high school. Despite access to healthcare services is deemed easy (49.80%), patients and their 
families (73.64%) need to pay for essential care and tests, with one in five respondents finding it difficult to 
travel to the treating centres and have access to treatment due to high costs for travel and treatment, 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
237 
respectively. More than 74% of respondents lose more than 11 days per year from education or work for their 
treatment. 
 
Western Pacific Region 
In the Western Pacific region, the majority of respondents are employed and full-time workers (43.50%). Almost 
half of them are married (47.80%) and almost half (47.80%) single. Education levels vary, with 26.10% not being 
able to graduate from high school and 30.40% being holders of a bachelor’s degree. While the accessibility of 
treatment is relatively easy (30.40%), patients and their families need to pay out of pocket for essential 
healthcare (56.52%). The majority of respondents lose between 1 and 5 days from education or work for 
treatment purposes. 
 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
A. Quality of Life: Encompassing Quality of Care and Social 
Protection 
The quality of life of people with thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders depends on two major factors: 
i) the quality of medical care they receive, including access to multidisciplinary care; and ii) their access to social 
protection schemes that safeguard them from the impact of the social determinants of health on their health 
outcomes [Klonizakis et al., 2023]. It is thus evident that the two factors need to be present in harmony and in 
an equilibrium in a national setting in order to achieve the optimal well-being and successful social integration 
of patients and thus alleviate the medical, public health, social and economic burden of the disease. 
This can be easily understood by comparing the quality of services and the level of social integration of patients 
between developed and developing countries that present great discrepancies in terms of poverty, availability 
and effectiveness of services and social benefits. The general idea is that in countries where quality treatment 
Combining findings from the Targeted Literature Review and TIF Survey 2022-2023 
 
The vast heterogeneity within and across regions of the world indicates that social integration remains a 
huge global challenge. It is evident that in countries where healthcare is provided free of charge, in the 
context of universal health coverage, and combined with social benefits, patients have a better quality of 
life, i.e., they have a greater life expectancy, are able to get married and have a family, study and pursue 
a career, live independently without support from their families. As literature and patient testimonies 
have shown, thalassaemia places such a toll on the patients’ lives that causes severe mental health issues 
both to them and their families who undertake the role of caregivers. This is not yet recognised enough 
even in developed countries and regions of the world, forcing patients to pay out of pocket for access to 
psychological support. This shows that a holistic approach in healthcare is needed, combined with 
targeted social measures to alleviate the daily burden of the disease and allow an easier social integration. 
 
The combination and comparison of findings is available in Annex III below. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
238 
and multidisciplinary care are indeed available and so experience fewer or milder complications in vital organs, 
as set out in the previous chapters of this Review, patients are more easily integrated into society by having 
access to education, work and other opportunities. This allows them to become part of their country’s ageing 
population and are thus entitled to social benefits that are available to either the general public or other 
vulnerable groups. Social benefits ease their access to both treatment and social life, allowing them to fully 
enjoy all their rights.  
In Cyprus, a country of the developed world, thalassaemia has been prioritised on the national health agenda 
since the 1970s, in recognition of the immense medical, social, economic and public health repercussions that 
the disease would have by 2000, if an effective national control programme was not implemented. Such a 
programme allowed for the provision of services to focus on the appropriate and timely clinical management 
of patients, to enable them to live a longer, more fulfilling and active life. Today boasting one of the oldest 
thalassaemia patient populations in the world, evidenced by patients living into their 50s and 60s, Cyprus has 
also achieved significant strides in the social, educational and professional integration of patients. According to 
the latest available data [Angastiniotis et al., 2022], 53% of patients are university graduates, with an additional 
40% having completed secondary education. Similar to the non-thalassaemia population, 53% of thalassaemia 
patients have chosen to marry. Most notably, however, is that an average of 61.6% of female patients of child-
bearing age became mothers with approx. 291 pregnancies and giving birth to 328 children. At the same time 
there is a state-run social protection scheme in place that helps patients adhere to their treatments (transport 
allowances, flexible working hours at the thalassaemia centres to accommodate work-life-treatment needs), 
present less complications and have a better quality of life. This indicates that patients in Cyprus do enjoy an 
excellent quality of care that allows them to be fully integrated into society.  
India, a large country, highly populated, with a high prevalence and a high number of annual affected births 
with haemoglobin disorders, felt the necessity in 2016 to include thalassaemia and sickle cell disease in its 
national disability legislation, in an effort to support and improve the survival and quality of life of these 
patients. This initiative was taken because of the absence of a national universal health coverage system, the 
highly heterogeneous level of health services and taking into account the very low socioeconomic status of the 
vast majority of patients. While the national disability legislation is comprehensive and includes a plethora of 
social benefits for all disabled persons, it does not directly support the access of patients to the national 
healthcare services. Therefore, the limited access of patients to quality care and the decentralised system of 
governance that assigns state authorities with the responsibility of implementing federal acts, according to 
budget availability, lead to poor health outcomes, with the quality of life of patients with such chronic, complex 
disorders, currently reaching a nadir. 
It thus comes as no surprise that the disease-specific social protection scheme of India has not yielded concrete 
results yet for the thalassaemia population of the country that still struggles to address poverty-related 
challenges and to ultimately have access to basic treatment and care, covered by a universal health coverage 
scheme. In such a setting, any effort to support the social integration of patients would collapse, as the overall 
clinical condition of patients is the only factor allowing them to enjoy social security. 
Consequently, the access of patients to appropriate care and social protection schemes that address the social 
determinants of health are prerequisites for a better quality of life. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
239 
B. Migrant populations in the European Union as part of the 
picture: Leaving no patient behind 
In recent times, population movements have introduced new issues for displaced patients, whether they have 
migrated for economic reasons or are victims of forced migrations. Even though people have been travelling 
and moving from traditional homes for centuries, the 20th and 21st centuries have seen more mass 
movements, partly because travel is easier and partly because of political unrest and changes.  
The economic gap between nations, especially in the post-colonial era, has led to a South to North movement 
which inevitably means from tropical and sub-tropical regions with a high prevalence of haemoglobin disorders 
to Northern areas which are also more economically robust, are often the ex-colonial powers and where these 
disorders are rare in the indigenous population. In addition, these ‘Southern’ states are arenas of political 
disturbance in the 21st century while Europe, which was in turmoil during the 20th and past centuries, has now 
found stability through economic partnerships and political groupings. 
Sickle cell syndromes and the thalassaemia syndromes are becoming increasingly more common in the regions 
where they were previously rare and exotic medical entities and are forcing health services of host countries to 
adapt and consider services previously felt unnecessary; for example, neonatal screening to detect sickle cell 
and other variants is being adopted in Germany, Ireland, France and other EU Member states.  
Beyond however the need to meet the medical requirements of patients, authorities need to consider the 
health-related social support. Chronic congenital conditions such as these require health insurance coverage 
which precludes out of pocket expenses while the medical needs are constant and many. 
 
Figure 
9. 
Irregular 
EU 
border 
crossings 
by 
nationality 
in 
2023 
(January-August). 
Source: 
https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/promoting-our-european-way-
life/statistics-migration-europe_en 
 
25.20%
7.10%
6.60%
5%
4.90%
4.60%
3.90%
3.80%
3.70%
3.60%
3%
2.80%
2.20%
2.20%
21.60%
Irregular EU border crossings by nationality in 2023 (January-August)
Syrian
Guinean
Ivorian
Tunisian
Unknown
Aghani
Moroccan
Egypt
Bangladeshi
Pakistani
burkinabe
Turkish
Cameroonian
Malian
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
240 
Settlers can be people who have been living in a host country for a long time and may have become naturalised 
citizens and to some extent integrated. The experience of integration over time may serve as an example for 
health authorities to deal with a new wave of migrants. Such new arrivals, however, face many problems, 
especially if unregistered in the host country. Language difficulties, often coupled by illiteracy lead to poor 
communication. Cultural barriers to issues related to prevention must be understood. New arrivals often have 
poor knowledge of their rights, are not aware of the local facilities and especially health insurance, and yet 
inadequate or inappropriate information is often offered to them. The plight of those living in detention or 
reception areas for long periods, including poor living conditions, poor finances, xenophobia, racism, gender 
inequalities, not being considered in public health measures (e.g., COVID-19). All these issues are inevitably 
political, and authorities must take notice.  
A child needing blood transfusion and then regular follow-ups or a patient in acute vaso-occlusive crisis often 
visit inexperienced health professionals and services and may be asked to pay with money that they do not 
have. For health systems and welfare services to respond effectively, they need resilience in coping with new 
challenges. This depends on political and budgetary support but also on understanding of the issues and 
epidemiological knowledge, such as how many new patients and where in the country they are located. Social 
determinants must be known and support offered at all levels. Planning must include decisions concerning 
neonatal screening policies, the application of clinical standards to meet the needs of patients and to organise 
social support with, if need be, counselling on all issues in the language of the migrant. 
The first priority is to provide health insurance coverage even to unregistered migrants. Access to care, 
including assistance for transport; recognising the need of the family as a whole for income and lodging is 
important; directing families to NGOs who can possibly offer support. All these are elements of immediate 
social support while long-term support for education and access to innovative therapies should also be 
considered. 
In 2010, Atkin and Anionwo in the UK wrote: “Little more than twenty years ago, sickle cell and thalassaemia 
disorders could be dismissed as conditions of little interest to health and social care agencies.” In 2023 we feel 
that these conditions are now a priority for these agencies. 
 
C. The disease burden of thalassaemia: A new research field? 
In light of the above, thalassaemia progressively causes a certain disease or disability burden, often quantified 
in terms of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) or disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). Both of these metrics 
quantify the number of years lost due to disability (YLDs), sometimes also known as years lost due to disease 
or years lived with disability/disease. According to the Lancet Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk 
Factors Study (GBD), published in 2019, people with thalassaemias, mostly living in low-resource countries of 
South-East Asia, indeed lose a number of healthy and productive years due to disability, consequent to 
suboptimal health and social care. The discussion on whether thalassaemia may be considered as a disability is 
presented in a separate chapter. 
In general, accurate information on the burden of the disease remains fragmented due to the confined number 
of surveys and/or publications on this subject, the absence of national registries in most countries and 
consequently, the confined data available regarding the age distribution of the patient population, the life 
expectancy of patients or the cause of their death. The fragmentation is shown in Annex III, as data available is 
rather confined. Therefore, this is a field urgently calling for further investigation, research and policy action. 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
241 
CONCLUSION 
People with the most severe forms of thalassaemia syndromes need regular, lifelong blood transfusions and 
concomitant chelation therapy to stay alive. This means that they need to have uninterrupted access to 
treatment every 2–3 weeks, to the detriment of their education, as children, and work, as adults. To be able to 
have such access and at the same time a decent quality of life: 
• 
Healthcare needs to be provided free of charge, as part of a national universal health coverage scheme, 
to alleviate parents and subsequently patients from the heavy financial burden of treatment 
• 
Healthcare needs to be multidisciplinary and include mental health support services, given that 
patients often suffer from social isolation 
• 
The general public, including schoolteachers and employers, need to understand the challenges of the 
disease and show compassion and solidarity to patients and their families 
• 
Patients themselves need to know the clinical and non-clinical requirements for the management of 
their disease to feel empowered enough to pursue them in their respective national settings. 
While heading towards 2030, the United Nations’ Member States should take account of all tools available to 
“promote physical and mental health and well-being, and to extend life expectancy for all” and “achieve 
universal health coverage and access to quality health care” [UN Agenda for Sustainable Development], not 
leaving anyone behind, a commitment expressed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
Unarguably, emphasis needs to be given to the provision of both quality health care and inclusive, individualised 
and disease-sensitive social care to address the social determinants of health and achieve optimal outcomes. 
 
 
The position of the Thalassaemia International Federation is provided in Annex IV. 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
242 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Abbas, N., Gilani, T., & Asif, R. (2023). A 
Phenomenological Study of Psychosocial 
and Educational Challenges of Parents 
having 
Children 
with 
Thalassemia. 
Archives of Educational Studies (ARES), 
3(1), Article 1. 
2. Abdelaziz, G. A. M., Elsafi, O. R., Abdel 
Fattah, N. R., & Abdelazeem, M. (2023). 
Evaluation of Psychosocial Morbidity 
among Children and Adolescents with 
Beta-Thalassemia Major. The Egyptian 
Journal of Hospital Medicine, 90(2), 2526–
2533. 
https://doi.org/10.21608/ejhm.2023.2860
36 
3. 
Afzal, E., Sheikh, M. A., Bhaba, S. H., 
Ahmed, T., Iqbal, I., & Iqbal, M. K. (2023). 
Psychosocial Illness in Children with 
Thalassemia: 
A 
Case-Control 
Study. 
Journal of Rawalpindi Medical College, 
27(1). 
https://doi.org/10.37939/jrmc.v27i1.1825 
4. Al Sabbah, H., Khan, S., Hamadna, A., 
Ghazaleh, L., Dudin, A., & Karmi, B. (2017). 
Factors 
associated 
with 
continuing 
emergence 
of 
β-thalassemia 
major 
despite prenatal testing: A cross-sectional 
survey. International Journal of Women’s 
Health, Volume 9. 
5. Alam, N.-E.-, Islam, M. S., Suriea, U., 
Mohiuddin, R. B., Islam, Md. M., Akter, S., 
Aktar, S., Mahamud, N., Nasif, O., Alharbi, 
S. A., Batiha, G. E.-S., Bappy, Md. N. I., 
Sardar, D., Khatun, Mst. M., Chowdhury, 
K., & Mohiuddin, A. K. M. (2021). Public 
Perceptions and Attitudes of Bangladeshi 
Population 
towards 
Thalassemia 
Prevention: 
A 
Nationwide 
Study. 
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-139016/v1 
6. Alhamawi, R., Khader, Y., Abu Khudair, S., 
Tanaka, E., & Al Nsour, M. (2023). Mental 
Health and Psychosocial Problems among 
Children and Adolescents in Jordan: A 
Scoping 
Review. 
Children. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/children10071165 
7. 
Ali, S., & Haider, S. (2020). Quality of life of 
Thalassemia Patients. 
8. Alizadeh, M., Chehrzad, M. M., Mirzaee, 
M., & Leyli, E. K. N. (2019). Caregiver 
burden and related factors in parents of 
children with Thalassemia. Issue S, 9. 
9. Al-Oraimi, S. Z., & Davey, G. (2023). 
Combatting thalassemia in the United 
Arab Emirates. International Health, 
15(6), 
752–753. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/inthealth/ihad011 
10. Alsaad, A. (2020). Psychosocial Aspects of 
Thalassemia and Patient’s Quality of Life: 
A Narrative Review. Majmaah Journal of 
Health 
Sciences, 
8(1), 
82. 
https://doi.org/10.5455/mjhs.2020.01.009 
11. Al-sayed, E. A. H., Shafik, S. A., Gomaa, A. 
A. A., & El-Zayat, O. S. (2022). Caregivers 
burnout 
of 
their 
children 
with 
thalassemia. International Journal of 
Health 
Sciences, 
6546–6563. 
https://doi.org/10.53730/ijhs.v6nS4.9849 
12. Alshamsi, S., Hamidi, S., & Ozgen Narci, 
H. 
(2021). 
Productivity 
Loss 
and 
Associated Costs Among Patients with 
Transfusion-Dependent Thalassemia in 
Dubai, 
United 
Arab 
Emirates. 
ClinicoEconomics 
and 
Outcomes 
Research: 
CEOR, 
13, 
853–862. 
https://doi.org/10.2147/CEOR.S334724 
13. Amid, A., Saliba, A., Taher, A., & Klaassen, 
R. (2015). Thalassaemia in children: From 
quality of care to quality of life. Archives of 
Disease 
in 
Childhood, 
100. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2014-
308112 
14. Angastiniotis, M., Christou, S., Kolnakou, 
A., Pangalou, E., Savvidou, I., Farmakis, 
D., & Eleftheriou, A. (2022). The Outcomes 
of Patients with Haemoglobin Disorders in 
Cyprus: 
A 
Joined 
Report 
of 
the 
Thalassaemia International Federation 
and the Nicosia and Paphos Thalassaemia 
Centres 
(State 
Health 
Services 
Organisation). 
Thalassemia 
Reports, 
12(4), 
Article 
4. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/thalassrep120400
19 
15. Artiga, S., & Hinton, E. (n.d.). Beyond 
Health 
Care: 
The 
Role 
of 
Social 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
243 
Determinants in Promoting Health and 
Health Equity. 
16. Atkin, K., & Anionwu, E. N. (2010). The 
social consequences of sickle cell and 
thalassaemia: Improving the quality of 
support (17; Better Health Briefing). Race 
Equality 
Foundation. 
https://raceequalityfoundation.org.uk/wp
-content/uploads/2022/09/health-
brief17.pdf 
17. Batool, N., Saleem, Z., Saeed, H., 
Yasmeen, S., Anwar, R., Ahmad, F., 
Tauqeer, F., & Hassan Mahboob, M. B. 
(2022, January 1). Factors affecting health-
related quality of life (HRQoL) in Pakistani 
children with thalassemia. | Family 
Medicine &amp; Primary Care Review | 
EBSCOhost. 
https://doi.org/10.5114/fmpcr.2022.11301
2 
18. Behdani, F., Badiee, Z., Hebrani, P., 
Moharreri, F., Badiee, A. H., Hajivosugh, 
N., Rostami, Z., & Akhavanrezayat, A. 
(2015). Psychological Aspects in Children 
and Adolescents With Major Thalassemia: 
A Case-Control Study. Iranian Journal of 
Pediatrics, 
25(3), 
e322. 
https://doi.org/10.5812/ijp.25(3)2015.322 
19. Bibi, A., naeem,  muhammad, khan,  
samin, Hassan, M., & Asnath, L. (2018). 
Assessment of the Quality of Life of 
Children 
with 
Beta Thalassemia 
in 
Peshawar District: A Cross Sectional 
Study. Pakistan Journal of Medical 
Research, 60, 121. 
20. Chattoo, S., Atkin, K. M., Dyson, S., 
Ahmad, W. I. U., & Anionwu, E. (n.d.). 
Living 
with 
Sickle 
Cell 
or 
Beta 
Thalassaemia Trait: 
Implications 
for 
Identity and Social Life:Summary of 
research findings for health and social care 
professionals. 
21. Dalgiç, A. İ., Efe, E., Kaya, A., Sarvan, S., & 
Başer, 
H. 
(2018). 
Healthy 
Lifestyle 
Behaviors in Patients with Thalassemia 
Major. Gümüşhane University Journal Of 
Health Sciences, 7(1). 
22. Ghorbanpoor, 
M., 
Mirzaie, 
M., 
Mirhaghjou, S. N., & Atrkar Roshan, Z. 
(2020). 
The 
Relationship 
Between 
Psychosocial Status and Adherence to 
Treatment Regimen in Adolescents With 
Thalassemia. Journal of Holistic Nursing 
And 
Midwifery, 
30(2), 
78–85. 
https://doi.org/10.32598/jhnm.30.2.78 
23. Greco, F., & Marino, F. (2022). Editor’s 
Pick: Social Impact and Quality of Life of 
Patients 
with 
β-Thalassaemia: 
A 
Systematic 
Review. 
https://www.emjreviews.com/hematolog
y/article/social-impact-and-quality-of-
life-of-patients-with-β-thalassaemia-a-
systematic-review-
j060121/?site_version=EMJ 
24. Heidari, H., 
& Ahmadi, A. (2020). 
Explaining Consequences of Parents 
Having 
Child 
with 
Thalassemia: 
Qualitative Study. Medical - Surgical 
Nursing 
Journal, 
9(2), 
Article 
2. 
https://doi.org/10.5812/msnj.106312 
25. Hossain, M. J., Islam, M. W., Munni, U. R., 
Gulshan, R., Mukta, S. A., Miah, M. S., 
Sultana, S., Karmakar, M., Ferdous, J., & 
Islam, M. A. (2023). Health-related quality 
of life among thalassemia patients in 
Bangladesh 
using 
the 
SF-36 
questionnaire. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 
7734. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-
34205-9 
26. Imtiaz, T., Muazzam, A., & Anjum, A. 
(n.d.). Development and Validation of Bio-
psychosocial Problems Scale for Patients 
with Thalassemia. 
27. International Labour Organization. (2020, 
March 26). Towards Universal Health 
Coverage: 
Social 
Health 
Protection 
Principles. 
https://www.ilo.org/publications/towards
-universal-health-coverage-social-health-
protection-principles 
28. International Labour Organization. (2021, 
September 1). World Social Protection 
Report 2020-22: Social protection at the 
crossroads – in pursuit of a better future. 
https://www.ilo.org/publications/flagship-
reports/world-social-protection-report-
2020-22-social-protection-crossroads-
pursuit 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
244 
29. International Social Security Association 
(ISSA). (n.d.). International Social Security 
Association – Country Profiles. Retrieved 
10 
July 
2024, 
from 
https://www.issa.int/databases/country-
profiles 
30. Irsa, S., Anam, I., Gulnaz, A., Sundas, N., 
Saba, K., & Asad, A. (2022). An Analysis of 
Challenges 
Faced 
by 
Thalassemic 
Patient’s 
Care 
Givers. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Innovative 
Research 
in 
Multidisciplinary Education, 01(01). 
31. Ishfaq, K., DIAH, N., Ali, J., Fayyaz, B., & 
Batool, I. (2018). Psychosocial problems 
faced by thalassemia major patients of 
district 
multan, 
Pakistan. 
Pakistan 
Paediatric Journal, 42, 23–27. 
32. Jajhara, I., Choudhary, G., Singh, J., 
Chachan, V., & Kumar, A. (2021). A study 
on quality of life among thalassemic 
children aged 8 to 18 years. International 
Journal of Contemporary Pediatrics, 8(10), 
1667–1674. https://doi.org/10.18203/2349-
3291.ijcp20213727 
33. Jeesh, Y. A. A., Yousif, M. E. A., & Al-
Haboub, M. A.-B. (2018). The Effects of 
Patients’ and Care-Givers’ Knowledge, 
Attitude, & Practice (KAP) on Quality of 
Life Among Thalassemia Major Patients’ 
in 
Damascus-Syrian 
Arab 
Republic. 
European Scientific Journal, ESJ, 14(12), 
308. 
https://doi.org/10.19044/esj.2018.v14n12
p308 
34. Karakul, A., Oymak, Y., & Karapınar, T. 
(2022). The Experiences of Parents of 
Children with Thalassemia Major in 
Turkey: A Qualitative Study. 
35. Khodashenas, M., Mardi, P., Taherzadeh-
Ghahfarokhi, N., Tavakoli-Far, B., Jamee, 
M., & Ghodrati, N. (2021). Quality of Life 
and Related Paraclinical Factors in Iranian 
Patients 
with 
Transfusion-Dependent 
Thalassemia. Journal of Environmental 
and Public Health, 2021(1), 2849163. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/2849163 
36. Klonizakis, P., Roy, N., Papatsouma, I., 
Mainou, M., Christodoulou, I., Pantelidou, 
D., Kokkota, S., Diamantidis, M., Kourakli, 
A., Lazaris, V., Andriopoulos, D., Tsapas, 
A., Klaassen, R. J., & Vlachaki, E. (2024). A 
Cross-Sectional, Multicentric, Disease-
Specific, Health-Related Quality of Life 
Study in Greek Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassemia Patients. Healthcare, 12(5), 
524. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare120505
24 
37. Kohlbry, P., Al-Karmi, B., & Yamashita, R. 
(2023). Quality-of-life of patients living 
with thalassaemia in the West Bank and 
Gaza. Eastern Mediterranean Health 
Journal = La Revue de Sante de La 
Mediterranee Orientale = Al-Majallah al-
Sihhiyah Li-Sharq al-Mutawassit, 29(6), 
425–435. 
https://doi.org/10.26719/emhj.23.045 
38. Koutelekos, J., & Haliasos, N. (2013). 
Depression and Thalassemia in children, 
adolescents and adults. Health Science 
Journal, 
7(3). 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/ba1
d4c950014efa426046d3bc48920f5/1?pq-
origsite=gscholar&cbl=237822 
39. Kumar, N., Singh, J., Khullar, H., & Arora, 
M. (2018). Cross sectional study to assess 
behavioral problems in multi-transfused 
thalassemic children and psychosocial 
factors affecting them. International 
Journal of Contemporary Pediatrics, 5(3), 
839–842. 
https://doi.org/10.18203/2349-
3291.ijcp20181479 
40. Kumaravel, K. S., Jagannathan, S., Balaji, 
J., Karthick, N. R., & Pugalendhiraja, K. V. 
(n.d.). Psychosocial Problems Associated 
with Transfusion Dependent Thalassemia 
in a Tribal Population. Pediatric Oncall 
Journal, 
13(4), 
99–102. 
https://doi.org/10.7199/ped.oncall.2016.4
5 
41. Lintang, R., & Murniati, M. (2020, January 
1). Supportive Care Needs: External 
Support for Parents of Children with 
Thalassemia. 
https://doi.org/10.2991/ahsr.k.200204.03
9 
42. Littlechild, B. (2016). The management of 
violence and aggression against staff in 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
245 
mental 
health 
work: 
Responding 
effectively 
through 
a 
co-production 
approach to issues for service users, 
carers, staff and agencies. Primary Health 
Care 
Open 
Access, 
06(02). 
https://doi.org/10.4172/2167-1079.C1.002 
43. M, J., A, B., & A, P. (2013). Psychosocial 
Problems in Thalassemic Adolescents and 
Young Adults. 4(1), 21–24. 
44. Maheri, A., Sadeghi, R., Shojaeizadeh, D., 
Tol, A., Yaseri, M., & Rohban, A. (2018). 
Depression, Anxiety, and Perceived Social 
Support 
among 
Adults 
with 
Beta-
Thalassemia 
Major: 
Cross-Sectional 
Study. Korean Journal of Family Medicine, 
39(2), 
101–107. 
https://doi.org/10.4082/kjfm.2018.39.2.10
1 
45. Mahmoudi 
Souran, 
H., 
Sanagouyemoharer, G. R., & Shirazi, M. 
(2019). Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy 
Improves 
Psychological 
Flexibility of Students with Thalassemia 
Major: A Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Practice in Clinical Psychology, 107–116. 
https://doi.org/10.32598/jpcp.7.2.107 
46. Mardhiyah, 
A., 
Panduragan, 
S. 
L., 
Mediani, H. S., & Rai, R. P. (2022). 
Integrating Family Empowerment Into 
Thalassemia Care for Adolescents in 
Indonesia: 
A 
Synthesis 
of 
Recent 
Evidence. Malaysian Journal of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, 18. 
47. Mardhiyah, 
A., 
Panduragan, 
S. 
L., 
Mediani, H. S., & Yosep, I. (2023, August 4). 
Psychosocial Problems on Adolescents 
with Thalassemia Major: A Systematic 
Scoping Review. | KnE Social Sciences | 
EBSCOhost. 
https://doi.org/10.18502/kss.v8i14.13834 
48. Mariani, D., Mulatsih, S., Haryanti, F., & 
Sutaryo. (2020, January 1). Life Experience 
of Adolescents with Thalassemia: A 
Qualitative 
Research 
with 
Phenomenological Approach. | Indian 
Journal of Public Health Research &amp; 
Development 
| 
EBSCOhost. 
https://doi.org/10.37506/v11/i1/2020/ijphr
d/193975 
49. Matthiesson, H. K., Berdoukas, V., & 
Briganti, E. M. (2023). Experiences, 
Knowledge Gaps and Information Needs 
of Women in Australia with Transfusion 
Dependent Thalassaemia in Regard to 
Fertility and Pregnancy. Maternal and 
Child Health Journal, 27(11), 1961–1967. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-023-
03683-8 
50. Mediani, H., Nurhidayah, I., Mardhiyah, 
A., & Panigoro, R. (2018). Indonesian 
Mothers’ Needs and Concerns about 
Having a Thalassemic Child and Its 
Treatment: An Exploratory Qualitative 
Study. Nursing & Primary Care, 1. 
https://doi.org/10.33425/2639-9474.1010 
51. Mettananda, S., Pathiraja, H., Peiris, R., 
Bandara, D., De Silva, U., Mettananda, C., 
& Premawardhena, A. (2019). Health 
related quality of life among children with 
transfusion dependent β-thalassaemia 
major and haemoglobin E β-thalassaemia 
in Sri Lanka: A case control study. Health 
and Quality of Life Outcomes, 17(1), 137. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12955-019-1207-
9 
52. Mettananda, S., Peiris, R., Pathiraja, H., 
Chandradasa, M., Bandara, D., De Silva, 
U., Mettananda, C., & Premawardhena, A. 
(2020). Psychological morbidity among 
children with transfusion dependent β-
thalassaemia and their parents in Sri 
Lanka. PLOS ONE, 15(2), e0228733. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0228
733 
53. Mikael, N. A., & Al-Allawi, N. A. (2018). 
Factors affecting quality of life in children 
and adolescents with thalassemia in Iraqi 
Kurdistan. Saudi Medical Journal, 39(8), 
799–807. 
https://doi.org/10.15537/smj.2018.8.23315 
54. Naderi, M., Raghibi, M., Nesheli, H. M., 
Mirbod, E. S., & Yaghoubi, S. (2021). A 
comparative study of body image in 
adolescents with beta-thalassemia major 
and healthy individuals. Caspian Journal of 
Pediatrics, 7(1). 
55. Nagiria, V. R., Vince, J. D., & Duke, T. 
(2021). Living with thalassaemia in Papua 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
246 
New Guinea, the experience of children, 
adolescents and their families. Journal of 
Paediatrics and Child Health, 57(10), 1589–
1593. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpc.15538 
56. Nasiri, 
M., 
Hosseini, 
H., 
& 
Shahmohammadi, S. 
(2014). 
Mental 
health status in patients with Thalassemia 
major in Iran. Journal of Pediatrics Review, 
2(1), 55–61. 
57. Othman, A., Abdul Ghani, M. S. A., Taib, F., 
& Mohamad, N. (2022). Psychological 
distress and coping strategies among the 
caretakers of children with transfusion-
dependent 
thalassemia. 
Frontiers 
in 
Pediatrics, 
10. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.941202 
58. Palanisamy, 
B., 
Kosalram, 
K., 
& 
Gopichandran, V. (2017). Dimensions of 
social capital of families with thalassemia 
in an indigenous population in Tamil Nadu, 
India – a qualitative study. International 
Journal for Equity in Health, 16(1), 109. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12939-017-0609-
8 
59. Phang, Y. C., Kassim, A. M., & Mangantig, 
E. (2021). Concerns of Thalassemia 
Patients, Carriers, and their Caregivers in 
Malaysia: Text Mining Information Shared 
on Social Media. Healthcare Informatics 
Research, 
27(3), 
200–213. 
https://doi.org/10.4258/hir.2021.27.3.200 
60. Platania, S., Gruttadauria, S., Citelli, G., 
Giambrone, L., & Di Nuovo, S. (2017). 
Associations of Thalassemia Major and 
satisfaction with quality of life: The 
mediating effect of social support. Health 
Psychology 
Open, 
4(2), 
2055102917742054. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2055102917742054 
61. Prajapati, N. K., Samani, M. J., & Jani, A. 
M. 
(2021). 
Caregiver 
Burden 
and 
Psychiatric Morbidity Among Caregivers 
of Children with Thalassemia Major: A 
Cross-Sectional Study. Annals of Indian 
Psychiatry, 
5(1), 
43. 
https://doi.org/10.4103/aip.aip_95_20 
62. Pranandita, 
F. 
(2021). 
Psychological 
Problems of Pediatric Patients with 
Thalassemia: 
A 
Narrative 
Literature 
Review. Open Access Indonesian Journal 
of Medical Reviews, 1(3), Article 3. 
https://doi.org/10.37275/oaijmr.v1i3.41 
63. Punaglom, N., Kongvattananon, P., & 
Somprasert, C. (2019). Experience of 
Parents Caring for Their Children with 
Thalassemia: Challenges and Issues for 
Integrative Review. The Bangkok Medical 
Journal, 
15(1), 
100–106. 
https://doi.org/10.31524/bkkmedj.2019.0
2.018 
64. Ramadan Korany, N., Sayed Ali, H., Abd 
ELRahman 
Abd 
ELRahman, 
A., 
& 
ELAshery Ashery, R. (2022). Relationship 
between Knowledge of Patients with 
Thalassemia and their Quality of Life. 
Egyptian Journal of Health Care, 13(4), 
612–625. 
https://doi.org/10.21608/ejhc.2022.26420
5 
65. Rasheed, R., & Nagpal, M. (2023). 
Psychosocial issues in Parents and 
Patients 
with 
Thalassemia. 
Dinkum 
Journal of Medical Innovations, 2(5), 188–
193. 
66. Rashid, M. A. U. H., & Abbasi, S.-U.-R. S. 
(2020). Theorizing 
Beta Thalassemia 
Major: An Overview of Health Sociology. 
International and Multidisciplinary Journal 
of 
Social 
Sciences, 
9(1), 
51. 
https://doi.org/10.17583/rimcis.2020.5113 
67. Raza, S. H., Ishfaq, K., & Fazal, H. (2015, 
February). Social Impact of Thalassemia 
Major on Patients’ Families. 2 nd 
International Conference on Education 
and Social Sciences. 
68. Sahu, S., Agrawal, A., Shrivastava, J., & 
Tonk, S. (2023). Psychiatric disorders and 
caregiver 
burden 
in 
children 
with 
transfusion dependent β-thalassaemia 
and their caregivers. World Journal of 
Clinical 
Pediatrics, 
12(3), 
125–132. 
https://doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v12.i3.125 
69. Saldanha, S. J. (2015). Stress and Coping 
among Parents of Children Having 
Thalassemia. International Journal of 
Science and Research, 4(7). 
70. Saqlain, S., Arif, S., Batool, S., Rehman, S., 
Usman, M., Sarfaz, M. U., Waseem, M. W., 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
247 
Akhlaq, M. Z., Ul Din, M. Z., Aziz, F., 
Salman, F., & Saeed, A. A. (2022). 
Psychosocial 
Problems 
Faced 
by 
Thalassemia Patients and their Parents. 
Journal 
of 
Society 
of 
Prevention, 
Advocacy and Research KEMU, 1(3). 
https://journalofspark.com/journal/index.
php/JSpark/article/view/105 
71. Sarhan, A. L., Modallal, S., Mahamid, F. A., 
& Berte, D. Z. (2022a). Depression 
symptoms and associated factors among 
thalassemia patients in the Palestinian 
Territories: 
A 
cross-sectional 
study. 
Middle East Current Psychiatry, 29(1), 2. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s43045-021-
00166-w 
72. Sarhan, A. L., Modallal, S., Mahamid, F. A., 
& Berte, D. Z. (2022b). Depression 
symptoms and associated factors among 
thalassemia patients in the Palestinian 
Territories: 
A 
cross-sectional 
study. 
Middle East Current Psychiatry, 29(1), 2. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s43045-021-
00166-w 
73. Septyana, G., Mardhiyah, A., & Widianti, 
E. (2019). The Mental Burden of Parents of 
Children 
with 
Thalassemia. 
Jurnal 
Keperawatan Padjadjaran, 7(1), 94–102. 
https://doi.org/10.24198/jkp.v7i1.1154 
74. Sevinç, S. (2023). Life satisfaction and 
difficulties experienced by the family 
members of individuals with thalassemia. 
Nursing 
Open, 
10(6), 
3914–3924. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.1649 
75. Shafi, N., Ahmed, S., & Siddique, A. R. 
(2021). The Psychosocial and Financial 
Ramifications of Thalassemia on Parents 
of Thalassemic Children Presented at 
Tertiary Care Hospitals. Open Journal of 
Pediatrics, 
11(03), 
379–387. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/ojped.2021.11303
4 
76. Siddiqui, S. H., Ishtiaq, R., Sajid, F., & 
Sajid, R. (2014). Quality of Life in Patients 
with Thalassemia Major in a Developing 
Country. Journal of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan, 24(7), 
477–480. 
77. Social Health Protection: An ILO strategy 
towards universal access to health care. 
International 
Labour 
Office. 
(2008). 
https://www.ilo.org/sites/default/files/wc
msp5/groups/public/@ed_protect/@soc_
sec/documents/publication/wcms_secsoc
_5956.pdf 
78. Sodani, S. S., Sampat, S. P., Subhash, S. S., 
& Tukaram, P. H. (2017). Assessment of 
Psychosocial Impact 
on Parents of 
Thalassemic Children. SAS Journal of 
Medicine, 3(3), 57–60. 
79. SSA: The United States Social Security 
Administration. (n.d.). SSA - POMS: DI 
23022.931 - Beta Thalassemia Major - 
08/20/2020. Retrieved 11 July 2024, from 
https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0423
022931 
80. Stankiewicz, A., Herel, M., & DesMeules, 
M. (2015). Rio Political Declaration on 
Social 
Determinants 
of 
Health: 
A 
Snapshot of Canadian Actions 2015. 
Health Promotion and Chronic Disease 
Prevention in Canada : Research, Policy 
and Practice, 35(7), 113–114. 
81. Taheri Mirghaed, M., Farhadi, Z., & 
Salemi, M. (2021). Correlation of General 
Health Status of Patients with Major 
Thalassemia 
with 
Demographic 
Characteristics Organizational Culture 
and the Organizational Commitment; 
Correlational Study in Hospital Staffs View 
project Article Patients’ Satisfaction with 
Medical Emergency Services in Iran from 
2000 to 2017: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis Article The Prevalence of 
Migraine in Iran: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis View project. Journal of 
Health Promotion Management, 9(1), 18–
24. http://dx.doi.org/10.21859/jne-08407 
82. Thiyagarajan, A., Bagavandas, M., & 
Kosalram, K. (2019). Assessing the role of 
family well-being on the quality of life of 
Indian children with thalassemia. BMC 
Pediatrics, 
19(1), 
100. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-019-1466-
y 
83. Uchil, A., Muranjan, M., & Gogtay, N. J. 
(2023). 
Economic 
burden 
of 
beta-
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
248 
thalassaemia 
major 
receiving 
hypertransfusion therapy at a public 
hospital in Mumbai. The National Medical 
Journal 
of 
India, 
36, 
11–16. 
https://doi.org/10.25259/NMJI_580_20 
84. ul Hassan Rashid, M. A., Abbasi, S.-R. S., & 
Manzoor, M. M. (2020). Socio-religious 
Prognosticators of Psychosocial Burden of 
Beta Thalassemia Major. Journal of 
Religion and Health, 59(6), 2866–2881. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10943-020-
01069-6 
85. United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs (DESA). (2016). Leaving 
no one behind: The imperative of inclusive 
development (Vereinte Nationen, Ed.). 
United Nations. 
86. Venty, V., Rismarini, R., Puspitasari, D., 
Kesuma, Y., & Indra, R. M. (2018). 
Depression in children with thalassemia 
major: 
Prevalence 
and 
contributing 
factors. Paediatrica Indonesiana, 58(6), 
263–268. 
https://doi.org/10.14238/pi58.6.2018.263-
8 
87. Wangi, K., Birriel, B., & Smith, C. (2023). 
Psychosocial 
burden 
in 
transfusion 
dependent beta-thalassemia patients and 
its impact on the quality of life and the 
problem of dignity. Journal of Taibah 
University Medical Sciences, 18(6), 1217–
1219. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtumed.2023.05.
002 
88. What Does It Mean To Leave No One 
Behind? A UNDP discussion paper and 
framework for implementation. (2018, 
July). 
United 
Nations 
Development 
Programme. 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke
326/files/publications/Discussion_Paper_
LNOB_EN_lres.pdf 
89. World 
Health Organization. 
(n.d.-a). 
Global Health Estimates: Life expectancy 
and leading causes of death and disability. 
Retrieved 
11 
July 
2024, 
from 
https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/them
es/mortality-and-global-health-estimates 
90. World Health Organization. (n.d.-b). The 
world health report: Health systems 
financing: The path to universal coverage. 
Retrieved 
11 
July 
2024, 
from 
https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/44371 
91. World 
Health 
Organization. 
(1986). 
Ottawa charter for health promotion. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
WH-1987 
92. World 
Health 
Organization. 
(2004). 
Declaration of Alma-Ata International 
Conference on Primary Health Care, 
Alma-Ata, USSR, 6–12 September 1978. 
Development, 
47(2), 
159–161. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.develop
ment.1100047 
93. World Health Organization. (2005a). 
Disability, 
including 
prevention, 
management and rehabilitation. World 
Health Assembly, 58, Article WHA58.23. 
https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/106
65/20373/WHA58_23-
en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
94. World Health Organization. (2005b). 
Sustainable health financing, universal 
coverage and social health insurance. 
World 
Health 
Assembly, 
58. 
https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/106
65/20383/WHA58_33-
en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y 
95. World Health Organization. (2013). World 
health report 2013: Research for universal 
health 
coverage. 
https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/85761 
96. World 
Health 
Organization. 
(2015). 
Reducing 
health 
inequities 
through 
actions on the social determinants of 
health. Eastern Mediterranean Health 
Journal, 
21(11), 
853–855. 
https://doi.org/10.26719/2015.21.11.853 
97. World 
Health 
Organization. 
(2021). 
Resolution on the Social Determinants of 
Health. 
Executive 
Board, 
148th 
session(Agenda 
item 
16). 
https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/
EB148/B148_CONF2-en.pdf 
98. World Health Organization & World Bank. 
(2011). World 
Report 
on 
Disability. 
https://www.who.int/teams/noncommuni
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
249 
cable-diseases/sensory-functions-
disability-and-rehabilitation/world-
report-on-disability 
99. Yousuf, R., Akter, S., Wasek, S. M., Sinha, 
S., Ahmad, R., & Haque, M. (n.d.). 
Thalassemia: A Review of the Challenges 
to the Families and Caregivers. Cureus, 
14(12), 
e32491. 
https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.32491 
100. Zaheer, Z., Wazir, S., Hameed, B., 
Zeeshan, S., Zaman, Q., & Iqbal, M. (n.d.). 
Psychological Burden in β-Thalassemia 
Affected Families. 29(4). 
101. Zakiyah, I., Mediani, H. S., & Mardiah, W. 
(2018). Literature Review: Stress and 
Mother Life Quality with Thalassemia 
Children Major Ages 0–18 Years. Journal of 
Nursing 
Care, 
1(3). 
https://doi.org/10.24198/jnc.v1i3.18524 
102. Zeykani, M., & Nikmanesh, Z. (2018). The 
Effect of Positive Psychotherapy on 
Perceived Competence and Quality of Life 
Among 
Children 
With 
Thalassemia. 
Jundishapur Journal of Chronic Disease 
Care, 
7(1), 
Article 
1. 
https://doi.org/10.5812/jjcdc.60809 
103. Zhang, R., Zhang, S., Ming, J., Xie, J., Liu, 
B., Chen, C., Sun, X., & Zhen, X. (2023). 
Predictors of health state utility values 
using SF-6D for Chinese adult patients 
with β-thalassemia major. Frontiers in 
Public 
Health, 
10, 
1072866. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.10728
66 
104. Zhen, X., Ming, J., Zhang, R., Zhang, S., 
Xie, J., Liu, B., Wang, Z., Sun, X., & Shi, L. 
(2023). Economic burden of adult patients 
with β-thalassaemia major in mainland 
China. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, 
18(1), 252. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-
023-02858-4
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
250 
ANNEX I: Survey Results (Per Region) 
Employment Status 
 
Relationship Status 
 
Employed,
working full-
time
Employed,
working part-
time
Not
employed,
looking for
work
Not
employed,
NOT looking
for work
Retired
Disabled, not
able to work
No answer
African Region
30%
10%
40%
20%
0%
0%
0%
Region of the Americas
58.30%
8.30%
8.30%
16.70%
0%
8.30%
0%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
20.60%
9.50%
35.10%
12.50%
2.10%
17.40%
2.80%
European Region
40.90%
12.00%
11.50%
6.70%
20.20%
7.20%
1.40%
South-East Asian Region
21.80%
7.70%
14.00%
52.40%
0.40%
2.90%
0.70%
Western Pacific Region
43.50%
8.70%
34.80%
4.30%
4.30%
4.30%
0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Employment Status
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Cohabiting
Single,
never
married
Prefer not
to answer
No answer
African Region
20%
0%
0%
0%
60%
20%
0%
0%
Region of the Americas
41.70%
0%
0%
8.30%
8.30%
41.70%
0%
0%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
34.30%
1.50%
11.00%
0.80%
30.90%
26.40%
2.70%
2.40%
European Region
46.60%
1.00%
3.80%
2.90%
13.50%
29.30%
1.90%
1.00%
South-East Asian Region
29.60%
1.30%
0.30%
1.20%
42.00%
22.40%
2.70%
0.60%
Western Pacific Region
47.80%
0%
4.30%
0%
0%
47.80%
0%
0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Relationship Status
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
251 
Education 
 
Out-of-Pocket Expenses 
 
Less than
high school
degree
High school
degree
Some
college but
no degree
Bachelor
degree
Master
degree
Doctoral
degree
Trade
School
No answer
African Region
0%
30%
10%
20%
30%
10%
0%
0%
Region of the Americas
8.30%
25.00%
8.30%
8.30%
50.00%
0%
0%
0%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
29.30%
22.10%
8.10%
27.80%
5.90%
1.10%
2.00%
3.60%
European Region
11.50%
29.30%
6.30%
28.80%
17.30%
1.40%
4.80%
0.50%
South-East Asian Region
17.20%
19.30%
7.70%
16.80%
6.20%
0.70%
0.40%
31.70%
Western Pacific Region
26.10%
21.70%
13.00%
30.40%
8.70%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
%  of Respodents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Education
Transfusion
Chelation
pumps
Chelation
drugs
Lab tests
MRI
Hospitalisat
ion
Multidiscipl
inary Care
No answer
African Region
0%
10%
10%
70%
70%
0%
50%
10%
Region of the Americas
0%
0%
8.33%
50%
8.33%
8.33%
25%
33.30%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
24.75%
20.79%
35.19%
47.16%
31.50%
34.11%
36.81%
14.20%
European Region
7.69%
3.85%
9.62%
19.71%
14.42%
4.33%
26.44%
44.70%
South-East Asian Region
60.53%
9.13%
59.06%
68.34%
19.15%
15.76%
17.82%
16.30%
Western Pacific Region
43.48%
17.39%
13.04%
60.87%
8.70%
39.13%
21.74%
0
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Out-of-Pocket Expenses (Services)
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
252 
Who bears the financial burden of treatment 
 
Accessibility of Treatment 
 
Myself/My
family
Health
Insurance
(private):
mine
Health
insurance
(private): my
employer's
State-
provided
free
healthcare
State-
provided,
partly free
Other
No answer
African Region
80.00%
20.00%
10.00%
40.00%
20.00%
0.00%
10.00%
Region of the Americas
50.00%
0.00%
16.67%
41.67%
0.00%
8.33%
0.00%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
58.33%
13.50%
5.76%
24.48%
22.32%
7.65%
3.20%
European Region
27.40%
6.73%
2.88%
61.06%
22.60%
2.88%
1.90%
South-East Asian Region
73.64%
3.68%
3.24%
20.77%
4.57%
32.84%
1.60%
Western Pacific Region
56.52%
4.35%
8.70%
30.43%
17.39%
8.70%
0.00%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Who pays for treatment
Very difficult
Difficult
Neutral
Easy
Very easy
No answer
African Region
10%
60%
0%
20%
10%
0%
Region of the Americas
8.30%
8.30%
33.30%
41.70%
8.30%
0%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
21.20%
25.50%
37.90%
10.20%
2.80%
2.40%
European Region
3.40%
10.10%
28.80%
38.00%
19.70%
0%
South-East Asian Region
5.90%
22.20%
15.20%
49.80%
6.20%
0.70%
Western Pacific Region
4.30%
21.70%
34.80%
30.40%
8.70%
0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Accessibility of treatment
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
253 
Reasons for difficulty in access to treatment 
 
Loss of Days from Education and Work 
 
High cost of travel to
treating center
High cost of treatment
High cost of both travel
to the treating centre
and treatment
No answer
African Region
0%
10%
50%
40%
Region of the Americas
8.30%
16.70%
8.30%
66.70%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
15.60%
25.60%
22.70%
36.20%
European Region
9.60%
4.30%
5.30%
80.80%
South-East Asian Region
17.70%
6.80%
11.90%
63.60%
Western Pacific Region
17.40%
17.40%
8.70%
56.50%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Accessibility of treatment (Why difficult)
None
1-5 days
6-10 days
11-15 days
16 or more
days
No answer
African Region
20%
10%
10%
20%
40%
0%
Region of the Americas
33.30%
0%
8.30%
0%
58.30%
0%
Eastern Mediterranean Region
13.60%
8.50%
4.50%
29.90%
41.20%
2.30%
European Region
29.30%
10.10%
5.80%
9.60%
42.30%
2.90%
South-East Asian Region
8.50%
9.90%
4.40%
34.50%
39.80%
2.90%
Western Pacific Region
17.40%
34.80%
8.70%
8.70%
13.00%
17.40%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
% of Respondents
TIF Survey 2022-2023
Loss of Days from Education and Work
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
254 
ANNEX II: Social benefits provided to people with 
haemoglobin disorders 
 
 
Child and Family
Maternity
Sickness
Unemployment
Employment Injury
Survivors
Old age
Disability / 
Invalidity
Effective Coverage 
(%) - Severe 
Disabilities (2015)
Contributory 
(Social Insurance)
Contributory 
(Provident Fund)
Non-Contributory 
(Universal)
Non-Contributory 
(Means-tested)
Contributory 
(Social Insurance)
Non-Contributory 
(Disability Law)
1) Monthly 
Allowance
2) Early Retirement
3) Higher Education 
Facilities
4) Employment 
Facilities
4) Tax Reduction
5) Reimbursement 
for perm. damages
6) Afternoon 
Clinics
7) Leave days for 
transfusions
8) Travel Allowance
1 Albania
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 Austria
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
9 3 . 3
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
¢
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 Azerbaijan
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
4 Belgium
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
5 Bulgaria
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
6 Cyprus
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
2 6 . 5
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
•
•
•
•
•
N o n e
•
N o n e
•
7 France
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
8 Germany
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
7 3 . 6
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
9 Greece
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
•
•
•
•
•
N o n e
N o n e
•
•
10 Italy
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
•
•
•
N o n e
•
•
N o n e
•
•
11 Sweden
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
12 Turkey
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
5
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
13 United 
Kingdom
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
14 Egypt
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
15 Iran
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
16 Lebanon
Ÿ
¡
¡
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
17 M orocco
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
18 Oman
N o n e
¢
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
19 Saudi Arabia
N o n e
¢
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 0 United Arab 
Emirates
…
¢
…
¢
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Ÿ
•
¡
N o n e
•
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
2 1 Bangladesh
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 8 . 5
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 2 India
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
5 . 4
Ÿ
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
•
N o n e
•
•
N o n e
•
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
2 3 Nepal
N o n e
¢
¢
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 4 Sri Lanka
Ÿ
¢
o
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
2 0 . 8
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 5 Thailand
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
3 5 . 7
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 6 Australia
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 7 Cambodia
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
¢
Ÿ
¡
¡
¡
0 . 7
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 8 China
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
2 9 Singapore
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 0 Viet Nam
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
9 . 7
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
Be ne f it s t o whic h pe ople  wit h Hb disor de r s a r e  e nt it le d
Ge ne r a l P opula t ion Be ne f it s
Disa bilit y  Be ne f it s
Dise a se - spe c if ic  Be ne f it s
1
2
3
Source: ILO, World Social Protection Report 2017-19: Universal 
social protection to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
Ra t if ic a t ion of  Int e r na t iona l La bour  
Or ga niz a t ion ( ILO)  S oc ia l S e c ur it y  Conv e nt ions 
& Imple me nt a t ion t hr ough Na t iona l S oc ia l 
S e c ur it y  Le gisla t ion
P r ov ide d upon 
disa bilit y  
a sse ssme nt  unde r  
t he  na t iona l S oc ia l 
S e c ur it y  /  Disa bilit y  
La ws
Source: International 
Social Security 
Association (ISSA) 
P r ov ide d unde r  t he  S oc ia l S e c ur it y  /  Disa bilit y  La ws t o 
pe ople  wit h ha e moglobinopa t hie s
Euro pean R egio n
Eastern M editerranean R egio n
So uth-East A sia R egio n
Western P acific R egio n
Source: TIF Survey & Questionnaire (2020)
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
255 
 
 
 
 
3 1 Algeria
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
3 . 6
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 2 M auritius
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 3 Republic of  
Congo
Ÿ
Ÿ
¢
N o n e
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 4 Argentina
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 5 Brazil
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 6 Canada
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
6 7 . 2
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 7 Trinidad and 
Tobago
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
¢
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
…
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
3 8 United States
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
1 0 0
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
Ÿ
N o n e
N o n e
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
―
A frican R egio n
R egio n o f the A mericas
Ÿ
¡
¢
o
…
Inc omple t e  inf or ma t ion a v a ila ble
Count r ie s wit h a t  le a st  one  
pr ogr a mme  a nc hor e d in na t iona l 
Le gisla t ion not  y e t  e nt e r e d int o f or c e
Only  be ne f it  in k ind
Limit e d pr ov ision
Inf or ma t ion r e la t e d t o a dja c e nt  c e lls
Count r ie s t ha t  r a t if ie d ILO 
c onv e nt ions on soc ia l se c ur it y
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
256 
ANNEX III: Combination/Comparison of Findings 
 
Region 
AFR 
AMR 
EMR 
EUR 
SEAR 
WPR 
Social 
Benefits 
Available 
(Overall) 
Limited 
Yes 
Limited 
(UAE thal-
specific) 
Yes 
(CY, GR, IT thal-
specific) 
Limited 
(India thal-
specific) 
Limited 
Social Determinants of Health 
Economic Stability 
Employment - Expenses/ Debt/ Medical Bills 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
Financial 
burden 
Financial 
Burden / 
Affordability 
of treatment / 
Loss of days 
from work 
Loss of days from 
work 
Financial 
burden 
Loss of days 
from work 
Financial 
burden 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Unemployed 
but looking 
for work / 
Loss of days 
from work 
Employed, 
working full 
time / 
Financial 
burden / Loss 
of days from 
work 
Unemployed 
but looking 
for work / Loss 
of days from 
work / 
Financial 
burden 
Loss of days from 
work / Out-of-
pocket expenses 
for 
multidisciplinary 
care 
Not employed 
and not 
looking for 
work 
Financial 
burden 
Financial Support / Universal Health Coverage 
Literature 
Review 
Not available 
Added value 
of social 
benefits for 
access 
Not available 
in all countries 
State-provided / 
free healthcare 
Not available / 
Need for 
social support 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Not available / 
Need for 
social support 
Not available 
in all countries 
Neighbourhood and Physical Environment 
Transportation 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Access to 
treatment 
centres remains 
challenging for 
specific countries 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Poor access 
to treatment 
centres 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Easy access to 
treatment in 
general 
Access to 
treatment 
centres 
remains 
challenging 
for specific 
countries 
No data 
available 
 
Education 
Literacy / Education 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Loss of days from 
school 
Loss of days 
from school 
Need for 
disease-
specific 
literacy 
(problem of 
adherence) 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Loss of days 
from school 
Loss of days 
from school 
No data 
available 
 
Loss of days from 
school 
Loss of days 
from school 
Loss of days 
from school 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
257 
Community and Social Context 
Support systems (incl. caregivers) 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Support to 
caregivers 
needed 
Need to 
strengthen 
support 
systems 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Community engagement 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Need to raise 
community 
awareness 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Stress / Mental Health 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
Psychological 
support 
needed 
Psychological 
support 
needed 
Psychological 
support needed 
Psychological 
support 
needed 
Psychological 
support 
needed 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Healthcare System 
Health coverage 
Literature 
Review 
Not available 
No data 
available 
 
Not available 
Yes 
Not available 
Not available 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Not available 
No data 
available 
 
Not available 
No data 
available 
 
Not available 
Not available 
Provider availability 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Multidisciplinary 
care not always 
available 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Limited 
No data 
available 
 
Limited 
Yes 
Limited 
No data 
available 
 
Quality of care 
Literature 
Review 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
Not available 
thus needed 
No data 
available 
 
TIF 
Survey 
2022-2023 
Limited 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
No data 
available 
 
 
 
 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
258 
ANNEX IV: The position of the Thalassaemia International 
Federation 
The Thalassaemia International Federation, 
Recalling the below-mentioned policy documents: 
Document Title 
Highlights 
Alma-Ata 
Declaration 
(1978) 
“V. Governments have a responsibility for the health of their people which can be fulfilled only 
by the provision of adequate health and social measures. A main social target of 
governments, international organizations and the whole world community in the coming 
decades should be the attainment by all peoples of the world by the year 2000 of a level of 
health that will permit them to lead a socially and economically productive life.” 
World Health 
Assembly 
Resolution 58.23 
(2005) 
“The Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly URGES Member States (4) to take all necessary steps 
for the reduction of risk factors contributing to disabilities during pregnancy and childhood; 
and (6) to implement, as appropriate, family counselling programmes including premarital 
confidential testing for diseases such as anaemia and thalassemia along with prevention 
counselling for intra-family marriages;” 
World Health 
Assembly 
Resolution 58.33 
(2005) 
“The Fifty-eighth World Health Assembly URGES Member States (4) to plan the transition to 
universal coverage of their citizens so as to contribute to meeting the needs of the population 
for health care and improving its quality, to reducing poverty, to attaining internationally 
agreed development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium 
Declaration, and to achieving health for all” 
United Nations 
Convention on 
the Rights of 
Persons with 
Disabilities 
(2006) 
“Persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or 
sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and 
effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.” 
“Article 19: States Parties to the present Convention recognize the equal right of all persons 
with disabilities to live in the community, with choices equal to others, and shall take effective 
and appropriate measures to facilitate full enjoyment by persons with disabilities of this right 
and their full inclusion and participation in the community, including by ensuring that: b) 
Persons with disabilities have access to a range of in-home, residential and other community 
support services, including personal assistance necessary to support living and inclusion in 
the community, and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community” 
World Health 
Assembly 
Resolution 62.14 
(2009) 
The Sixty-second World Health Assembly URGES Member States (3) to take into account 
health equity in all national policies that address social determinants of health, and to 
consider developing and strengthening universal comprehensive social protection policies, 
including health promotion, disease prevention and health care, and promoting availability of 
and access to goods and services essential to health and well-being” 
World Health 
Report 2010 
“There are many ways to promote and sustain health. Some lie outside the confines of the 
health sector. The circumstances in which people grow, live, work, and age strongly influence 
how people live and die. Education, housing, food and employment all impact on health. 
Redressing inequalities in these will reduce inequalities in health.” 
World Health 
Report 2013 
“The goal of universal health coverage is to ensure that everyone can use the health services 
they need without risk of financial ruin or impoverishment. These services range from 
clinical care for individual patients to the public services that protect the health of whole 
populations, coming from both within and beyond the health sector.” 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
259 
Document Title 
Highlights 
UNGA 
Resolution 
A/RES/67/81 
(2012) 
“The General Assembly, (4) invites Member States to adopt a multisectoral approach and to 
work on determinants of health within sectors including, as appropriate, through the health-
in-all-policies approach, while taking into consideration the social, environmental and 
economic determinants of health, with a view to reducing health inequities and enabling 
sustainable development, and (14) recognizes that it is essential to take into consideration the 
needs of vulnerable segments of society, including the poorest and marginalized segments of 
the population, indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities, in accordance with the 
principle of social inclusion, in order to enhance their ability to realize their right to the 
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health” 
UNGA 
Resolution 
A/RES/70/1 
(2015) 
“We envisage a world free of poverty, hunger, disease and want, where all life can thrive. A 
world with equitable and universal access to quality education at all levels, to health care and 
social protection, where physical, mental and social well-being are assured.” 
“23. We are committed to ending poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including by 
eradicating extreme poverty by 2030. All people must enjoy a basic standard of living, 
including through social protection systems.” 
“26. To promote physical and mental health and well-being, and to extend life expectancy for 
all, we must achieve universal health coverage and access to quality health care. No one must 
be left behind.” 
UN Political 
Declaration of 
the High-level 
Meeting on 
Universal Health 
Coverage (2019) 
“10. Recognize the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and among 
countries through political commitment, policies and international cooperation including 
those that address social, economic and environmental and other determinants of health” 
“14. Recognize the fundamental importance of equity, social justice and social protection 
mechanisms as well as the elimination of the root causes of discrimination and stigma in 
health-care settings to ensure universal and equitable access to quality health services without 
financial hardship for all people, particularly for those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable 
situations” 
International 
Labor 
Organization 
Social Health 
Protection 
Principles (2020) 
“The lack of affordable quality health care and income security in case of sickness for the 
majority of the world’s population creates a risk of impoverishment, with greater impact on 
the most vulnerable.” “Social health protection principles provide a rights-based approach to 
achieve universal population coverage” 
WHO Executive 
Board Report 
EB148/24 (2021) 
“3. The world has seen considerable health gains over the last century, but their distribution is 
vastly unequal. Inequities in many health outcomes exist both within and between countries.” 
“13. Commitment at global, national and subnational levels is essential to tackle health 
inequities and their causes.” 
 
1. URGES Member States of the United Nations: 
 
(a) to recognise that at the heart of social health protection lies the protection of patients and their 
families against economic vulnerability. 
 
Living in or being vulnerable to poverty, fundamentally undermines the access of patients to quality health care in 
most countries of the world, often with lifelong and life-threatening consequences, directly impacting their 
SOCIAL HEALTH PROTECTION AND THALASSAEMIA:  
ADDRESSING THE SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH FOR IMPROVED HEALTH OUTCOMES 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
260 
opportunity to access quality social services and, destructively, undermining their dignity, confidence and overall 
well-being. 
 
(b) to acknowledge that an optimal level of quality of life is produced by combining access to quality health 
care and state-provided social protection schemes. 
 
While quality of care is the key determining factor of the presence or absence of co-morbidities, subsequent to iron 
load and suboptimal care in most countries of the developing world, social protection schemes assist patients in 
their efforts to adhere to treatment and be socially active. 
 
2. Recommends: 
 
The establishment and/or strengthening of social health protection systems in order to provide universal access 
to needed health care and financial protection that is: 
 
i. 
accessible to cover all persons, especially those belonging to the most disadvantaged and 
marginalized groups, without discrimination 
ii. 
available under domestic law to ensure that benefits are effectively administered and 
supervised 
iii. 
adequate so that everyone may realise his or her rights to family protection and assistance, a 
reasonable standard of living and access to health care; and 
iv. 
affordable to reduce inequalities. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
261 
 
 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
262 
9. DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., Antoniou E., & Eleftheriou A., Farmakis D., Cannon L. 
 
ABSTRACT 
Thalassaemia can be a disability-inducing disease, if poorly treated or as complications increase with age, 
determined by the quality of medical management and social and personal factors. The ongoing debate on 
whether thalassaemia is a disability or not is thus complex and inconclusive and has created a vast 
heterogeneity of policies and approaches across the globe. Given that the risk to develop disabilities is subject 
to individualised assessment, Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) proposes a specific disability risk 
assessment model for thalassaemia (DRAM-Thal), based on the findings of a targeted literature review and of 
TIF survey 2022-2023. The model considers both clinical features and social parameters and is addressed to 
national social services and all other relevant stakeholders. At the same time, this work invites further research 
on the understudied topic of disability in thalassaemia that heavily affects the rights and daily life of people 
living with the disease. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last half century, the life expectancy of beta-thalassaemia patients has dramatically increased mostly due 
to appropriate management as per the recommendations of the international guidelines, including provision 
of regular blood transfusions, chelation treatments and multidisciplinary care. The improved survival, however, 
has increased the need to promote well-structured and co-ordinated multidisciplinary care for addressing 
existing and emerging comorbidities, such as cardiovascular disease, liver disease, diabetes mellitus, increasing 
pain, hearing loss [1-3], with a non-negligible impact on the patients’ quality of life. While thalassaemia itself is 
not directly a disability, as defined or perceived to date its impact as a disease and the impact of its complex, 
lifelong clinical needs, on an individual's health, everyday life and social integration can lead to various 
complications that may be considered disabilities, i.e. the loss, to a small or great level, of the patient’s ability 
and competency to achieve professional, education, personal, social and other goals. 
The debate on whether thalassaemia is a disability or not has been ongoing and inconclusive for decades. 
People with thalassaemia do not wish on the one hand, to be considered disabled persons to avoid stigma and 
consequently loss of opportunities to achieve social inclusion in all paths of life while , on the other hand, they 
are in need of lifelong appropriate, disease specific health and social care, through disability allowances and 
schemes in order to be able to smoothly integrate into society  and all other life settings. Successful social 
integration has been achieved in settings where optimal multidisciplinary health and social care schemes are 
available and are easily accessible to patients tailored to their needs, i.e. in Greece [4], Italy [5] and Cyprus [6]. 
In this work, Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) aims at shedding some new light on the different types 
of disability, identifying those types that may be part of the thalassaemia syndromes and suggesting a disability 
risk assessment model that may be used by the social services of each country for the individualised disability 
assessment of each person with thalassaemia. It also aims at encouraging researchers to focus on this 
understudied and controversial topic that is closely linked to the socioeconomic situation of each country. 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
263 
METHODOLOGY 
To be able to define disability, identify how it is associated with thalassaemia and develop a disability risk 
assessment model, we conducted a targeted literature review on the existing definitions of disability and 
identified those parameters of the disease (clinical and social) that relate to disability. After verifying those 
parameters through the findings of the TIF Survey 2022-2023, we developed a disability risk assessment model 
for thalassaemia (DRAM-Thal) addressed to the social services of each country and other interested 
stakeholders. 
 
FINDINGS 
Targeted Literature Review – Defining Disability 
Defining disability is a complex, evolving matter, as the term “disability” covers a broad range and degree of 
conditions. A disability may have been present at birth, caused by an accident, or developed over time. The 
most well-known definition of disability is included in the International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health (ICF), a framework published by the World Health Organization in 2001 for defining and measuring 
functioning and disability. According to the ICF [7], “disability is an umbrella term for impairments, activity 
limitations and participation restrictions, referring to the negative aspects of the interaction between an 
individual (with a health condition) and that individual’s contextual factors (environmental and personal 
factors)”. 
In 2006, the United Nations [8] in the “Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities” gave a more 
elaborated definition, stating that “persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, 
intellectual or sensory impairments, which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective 
participation in society on an equal basis with others”. Based on existing definitions, different countries perceive 
and define disability differently in national legislation. For instance, the Centres for Disease Prevention and 
Control (CDC) consider disability as “any condition of the body or mind (impairment) that makes it more difficult 
for the person with the condition to do certain activities (activity limitation) and interact with the world around 
them (participation restrictions)” [9]. The CDC further specifies that disability can be “related to conditions that 
are present at birth and may affect functions later in life, including cognition (memory, learning, and 
understanding), mobility (moving around in the environment), vision, hearing, behaviour, and other areas. 
These conditions may be disorders in single genes, including thalassaemia”. 
In general, disability is linked to limitations, either physical or cognitive, in each person’s daily activities. 
Disabilities can manifest in various forms and affect individuals in different ways. They are often categorised 
based on the nature of the impairment and its impact on a person's ability to perform daily activities. The UN 
definition of disability provides a broader framework for the categorisation of disability, that can be physical, 
mental, intellectual or sensory. The ICF Checklist [10] further elaborates these categories and refers to body 
functions and structures. Table 1 presents the different types of disability. 
 
 
 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
264 
Table 1. Amalgamation of categories of disabilities 
Physical 
Mental 
- 
Chronic Health Conditions (e.g. diabetes, 
cardiovascular conditions, respiratory 
conditions) 
- 
Mobility Impairments (e.g. paralysis, 
cerebral palsy, limb loss) 
- 
Dexterity or Fine Motor Skill Impairments 
(e.g. arthritis) 
- 
Neurological Disabilities (e.g. epilepsy, 
multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's Disease) 
- 
Mental Health Conditions (e.g. depression, 
anxiety) 
Intellectual 
Sensory 
- 
Learning Disabilities (e.g. dyslexia, 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder) 
- 
Memory Impairments 
- 
Visual Impairments (e.g. blindness, low 
vision) 
- 
Hearing Impairments (e.g. hearing loss, 
deafness) 
Communication 
Invisible 
- 
Speech Impairments (difficulties in 
articulation, fluency, or voice production) 
- 
Language Disorders (challenges in 
understanding or using language 
effectively) 
- 
Invisible Disabilities (e.g. chronic pain, 
chronic fatigue syndrome) 
 
Thalassaemia as A Disability-Including Disease – legislation and 
other official documents 
The diversity of opinions and practices concerning disability in various countries and in the minds of both 
patients and physicians affects the policies on patient social support such as disability pensions and age of 
retirement. It also has an effect on how patients perceive themselves, their body image, their social integration 
and general psychosocial adjustment. In addition, the concept of disability is absent when describing patient 
outcomes in these conditions, yet it is possible that limitations to function may occur over time even in well 
treated patients, while such limitations may be more evident at a young age in poorly treated patients.  
In 2005, the World Health Assembly in its Resolution on Disability [11] had expressly recognised thalassaemia 
as a disability, calling Member States to contain the number of new affected births by implementing “as 
appropriate, family counselling programmes, including premarital confidential testing for diseases such as 
anaemia and thalassaemia, along with prevention counselling for intra-family marriages”. Since then, according 
to available data, very few countries have explicitly recognised thalassaemia as a disability-inducing disease, 
incorporating it in national legislation. 
In 2005, the Australian Government included thalassaemia and other haemoglobinopathies requiring chelation 
therapy in its “List of Recognised Disabilities” [12]. In 2007, the United Arab Emirates included people with 
thalassaemia in their Disability Act [13]. In India, the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPWD) Act [14], 
adopted in December 2016, has recognised persons with blood disorders (Thalassaemia, Haemophilia and 
Sickle Cell Disease) as “persons with disabilities”. Those assessed with a benchmark disability of 40% are given 
a Disability Certificate and are entitled to several social benefits, including access to education, employment 
and financial support.  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
265 
In Greece, thalassaemia has also been directly associated with disability under national legislation that 
provides, inter alia, for social benefits such as early retirement and ease of access to public universities [15]. In 
Italy, thalassaemia has also been recognised as a disability through national legislation on disability that 
provides for several social benefits and allowances [16]. The United States and the United Kingdom provide 
thalassaemia patients with disease-specific allowances under the “Compassionate Allowances [17]” and the 
“Personal Independence Payment” [18] programmes, respectively, that are programmes addressed to people 
with disabilities. In Cyprus, even if thalassaemia is not officially recognised as a disability, the disease-specific 
allowances provided under the amended Social Insurance Law 59(I) of 2010 are a responsibility of the 
Department of Social Integration of People with Disabilities of the Deputy Ministry of Social Welfare. 
 
The Medical Perspective 
Based on the ICF model, the effects of a health condition on a patient’s life start from the body structures and 
functions that the condition affects and progresses to the activities and participation to varying degrees. The 
final effects are influenced by personal factors (such as education, adaptation, adherence) and social and 
environmental factors (such as family support, socio-economic status). Therefore, we must first identify based 
on the TIF Guidelines for the clinical management of transfusion-dependent thalassaemia [19], whether and 
which body structure defects exist and how these affect function. In fact, thalassaemia does not a priori come 
with any defects except for anaemia and if this is treated early, thalassaemia cannot be termed a disability. 
Disabilities appear if the patient is poorly treated or as complications increase with age [20], again determined 
by the degree and quality of medical management and qualified by social and personal factors. For these 
reasons, there can be no generalised claim of thalassaemia as a disability. Individuals with these syndromes can 
become disabled, according to the quantity and quality of clinical management [21]. The possible somatic 
consequences of the thalassaemia syndromes, as derived by the underlying pathophysiology, are described in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Comorbidities in TDT and NTDT – Source: Cappellini et al. 2021 & Taher et al. 2023 
 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
266 
Anaemia 
Anaemia results directly from the main pathophysiology of the disease and may cause symptoms, such fatigue, 
exercise intolerance, enlarged spleen or child irritability. In acute anaemia, these are prominent, but in anaemia, 
which is congenital and chronic, the patient may not feel any symptoms. A rapid fall in haemoglobin (acute on 
chronic) may, however, cause more subjective symptoms. 
• 
In transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT), diagnosis leads to blood transfusion and symptoms 
may appear before the next transfusion and eliminated by the transfusion. If not treated, a TDT 
individual will become progressively debilitated with extreme fatigue and weakness, compounded by 
splenomegaly, and the effects of ineffective erythropoiesis (described below). Extreme anaemia will 
also result in high-output heart failure [22], which is both debilitating and lethal. The prevalence of 
cognitive impairment is high amongst patients and is associated with low haemoglobin and the 
increasing age [23]. 
• 
In non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia (NTDT), there is chronic anaemia, which alone causes few 
symptoms in the majority of patients, given that the haemoglobin does not usually fluctuate very 
much, except in the event of acute episodes such as intercurrent infections [24]. Such episodes prompt 
blood transfusions and correction of the anaemia. Nevertheless, chronic anaemia will have other 
consequences which include tissue hypoxia affecting various organs that may lead to disability and 
death, such as high-output heart failure and pulmonary hypertension [25]. 
 
Bone Marrow Expansion 
Expansion of the erythropoietic tissue to compensate for ineffective erythropoiesis is a basic feature of the 
thalassaemia syndromes. This tissue expansion has various consequences. 
• 
Bone deformity: Within the bone marrow the tissue expansion from early life will disrupt bone 
microarchitecture and cause bone deformity, growth retardation and low bone mineral density. This 
can be extreme in poorly treated patients affecting long bones, spinal column, skull and facial bones. 
Deformity can affect body image and patient psychology, especially in adolescence; in this way, it can 
play a negative role in patient participation and social adjustment. Moreover, deformity of the facial 
and especially maxillary bones, which exceed the growth of the mandible, may lead to malocclusion 
with functional difficulties in eating and dental disease, besides aesthetic considerations [26]. 
• 
Osteoporosis is a major contributor to poor quality of life, causing bone pain, spinal deformities with 
collapsed vertebrae, which may result in nerve compression. Fractures are also a consequence and can 
occur at all ages with minimal trauma. Severe bone disease of this type can be regarded as disability 
as it can limit activity and participation. 
• 
Extramedullary haemopoietic masses (pseudotumors) may occur at various sites and any contribution 
to disability will depend on site and the size of the mass. In TDT, regular transfusions suppress 
abnormal haemopoiesis if the haemoglobin is maintained above 9 g/dl. If this level is not achieved in 
TDT, and especially in NTDT in which there is a persistent anaemia, such masses are encountered more 
frequently. Clinical debility is most often the result of paraspinal masses that cause compression of the 
spinal nerves, resulting in back pain and paraesthesia that may progress to paraparesis and paraplegia 
with effect on mobility. Such neurological effects may become permanent if not treated early (e.g. by 
blood hypertransfusions, hydroxyurea, irradiation). 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
267 
Iron overload 
• 
Iron overload, resulting from increased intestinal iron absorption due to ineffective erythropoiesis and 
particularly due to repetitive blood transfusions, may lead to vital tissue injury by free unbound iron 
radicals, but rarely to the extent that the label disability can be adopted. 
• 
Heart disease due to iron overload cardiomyopathy is frequent in TDT patients and later in life and may 
also affect NTDT patients. The clinical effects include ventricular dysfunction which can progress to 
heart failure and severe arrhythmias [27]. These can severely limit daily function and restrict social 
participation.  
• 
Liver disease is rarely debilitating in thalassaemia patients unless very advanced, including liver 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. 
• 
Endocrine complications are common in thalassaemia, but the effects on quality of life are rarely 
disabling since diagnosis is usually prompt and hormonal replacement effective. Delayed puberty and 
hypogonadism can seriously affect psychological maturation especially during adolescence. 
Hypothyroidism even if untreated causes non-specific symptoms but can contribute to heart 
complications. Diabetes can have serious disabling complications, including visual impairment, cardiac 
arrhythmias and stroke. Hypoparathyroidism can cause paraesthesia, prolonged QT interval, tetany, 
seizures and even heart failure [28]. In all endocrine complications, a degree of disability can be 
experienced in thalassaemia patients depending on the quality of monitoring and response from 
clinical experts. 
• 
Fertility can be affected in both males and females [29]. This may have psychological effects mainly. 
 
Vascular complications and hypercoagulability 
These are more common in NDTD patients, especially if splenectomised. The most common effects include leg 
ulcers and thromboembolic events. 
Leg ulcers are a complication which increases with age and can severely limit a patient’s freedom to move and 
participate, reducing quality of life [30]. There is ischaemia of the skin, leading to ulceration, which cannot heal 
easily and causes local pain. Such ulcers often take several months to heal and may require surgical intervention 
(skin grafting). 
Thromboembolic events are related to a hypercoagulable state which is related to splenectomy and NTDT [31]. 
These phenomena cause mainly venous thrombosis such as deep vein thrombosis, but are also associated with 
cerebrovascular events, which range from silent infarcts to overt stroke [32]. Pulmonary hypertension may also 
be related to hypercoagulability even this may not be the only causative factor [33]. 
 
Drug toxicity 
Several medications are taken regularly by thalassaemia patients and almost universal are the iron chelating 
agents desferrioxamine, deferiprone and deferasirox. All these can cause long term adverse effects, including 
ocular, auditory, bone growth retardation, allergic reactions, gastrointestinal disturbance, renal toxicity, liver 
toxicity, debilitating arthralgia, and finally agranulocytosis/neutropenia, which is mainly caused by deferiprone 
and can lead to susceptibility to severe infections. Hydroxyurea, even though generally well tolerated, can 
cause bone marrow suppression. This may cause bleeding (mainly gastrointestinal) and susceptibility to severe 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
268 
infections. Other reported side effects include mental/mood changes (such as confusion, hallucinations), 
seizures, dyspnoea, and renal toxicity. Bisphosphonates may cause osteonecrosis of the jaw but also 
hypocalcaemia, bone and joint pain and renal toxicity has been reported. Finally, recently approved therapies 
may cause bone pain, arthralgia, hypertension, and hyperuricaemia. In addition, thromboembolic events have 
been reported, which include DVT, pulmonary emboli, portal vein thrombosis and strokes [19]. 
 
 
 
The Patients’ Perspective 
Thalassaemia patients experience chronic fatigue and weakness due to the reduced oxygen-carrying capacity 
of their blood. While this is not always observable by others, it may impact their ability to engage in daily 
activities, energy levels and overall well-being, leading to depression, anxiety and other mental health 
challenges. Patients also need to address low self-esteem, especially when bone deformities and skeletal 
abnormalities are present due to bone marrow expansion. Moreover, progressive organ damage in the heart, 
liver and spleen, which is linked to iron overload, may affect physical function and mobility and lead to visible 
disabilities and a decreased quality of life.  
These effects that adversely affect the lives of patients and may cause disabilities, are manageable when 
patients are adherent and have access to appropriate medical management and treatment. Nonetheless, once 
developed, they are usually permanent rather than transient and are best prevented by holistic care or detected 
early to reduce progression. Early access to disease-specific education, supportive care, including counselling 
and rehabilitation services, and social care schemes and allowances or benefits, may be beneficial for 
addressing the broader impact of the condition on an individual's life and reducing the likelihood of disability. 
To better understand and clarify the health status of patients, and the correlation between each country’s 
income level and the risk of patients to develop disabilities, TIF ran a Survey between 2022 and 2023, addressed 
to patients and their families, and collected feedback from 2071 individuals from 48 countries, most of whom 
resided in lower income countries (1134, 56%), according to World Bank 2022 definition (Figure 2) [34]. 
In summary, from a medical perspective, the thalassaemia syndromes (especially TDT) that are optimally 
treated cannot be classified as disability. They allow a full range of activities and participation, including 
education, employment, marriage and raising a family. Involvement in most sports is possible including 
isolated reports of cases completing marathon runs. Such extreme sports, however, should be undertaken 
after medical assessment. NTDT should be viewed with caution since even carefully followed patients can 
develop complications from young adulthood. Complications of the condition and its treatment are in fact 
possible initiators of disabling, activity limiting developments. For this reason, it is usually the 
undertreated thalassaemia patient that can be classified as disabled but only after taking into account the 
nature and degree of disability. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
269 
 
Figure 2. Countries of Residence of Respondents (Categorised by World Bank Income Classes) According to the World 
Bank, lower middle-income economies are those with a Gross National Income (GNI) per capita between $1,136 
and $4,465; upper middle-income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $4,466 and $13,845; high-
income economies are those with a GNI per capita of $13,846 or more. 
 
Based on the parameters set by medical experts, as described above, we focused on specific questions that 
would reveal the quality of services in each country, whether patients are well treated and if they are prone to 
develop disabilities. The survey has indeed proven that people with thalassaemia living in developing (low and 
lower middle income) countries pay out of pocket to have access to health services and have a poorer clinical 
image compared to patients living in upper middle- and high-income countries. Such expenses hit the poor the 
hardest and threaten decades-long progress on health, leading people with thalassaemia closer to disability. 
 
Age 
Survey findings show that an ageing thalassaemia population lives in high income countries, indicative of the 
level of healthcare patients receive and of the confined or manageable number of comorbidities (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Mean Age of Respondents 
4%
56%
25%
15%
Countries of Residence of Respondents
(Categorised by World Bank Income Classes)
Low Income
Lower Middle Income
Upper Middle Income
High Income
Mean Age
Low Income
20.9
Lower Middle Income
26.5
Upper Middle Income
22.5
High Income
36.8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
% of Respondents
Mean Age of Respondents
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
270 
Accessibility of Healthcare 
Survey respondents indicated that they pay themselves for access to essential care in low and lower middle-
income countries, while multidisciplinary care remains challenging in such settings. Having to carry the burden 
of the treatment means that patients and their families need to have the financial means to do so (Figure 4 & 
5). Based on the survey findings, almost half of the respondents living in low-income settings are unemployed 
and one third is already disabled at a very young age, given that the median age of respondents is 20.9 years 
old (Figure 6). On the contrary, people living in high income countries have uninterrupted access to appropriate 
healthcare, without having to carry themselves or their families the burden of treatment. They are also 
employed, working full time and in position to have a better quality of life. 
 
Figure 4. healthcare services paid by out-of-pocket money by country income level 
 
Figure 5. Coverage schemes of healthcare services 
Transfusion
Chelation
pumps
Chelation
drugs
Lab tests
MRI
Hospitalisati
on
Multidiscipli
nary Care
No answer
Low Income
42.50%
23.75%
36.25%
52.50%
35.00%
58.75%
60.00%
1.25%
Lower Middle Income
47.35%
20.46%
60.14%
73.28%
31.75%
28.84%
28.92%
6.26%
Upper Middle Income
19.31%
9.27%
13.90%
25.10%
19.88%
19.69%
29.34%
27.41%
High Income
13.18%
2.25%
10.93%
17.04%
9.32%
9.32%
22.51%
50.16%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
% of Respondents
If paying out of pocket, which services are you paying for? 
Myself/my
family
Health
insurance
(private):
mine
Health
insurance
(private): my
employer's
State-
provided free
healthcare
State-
provided,
partly free
Other
No Answer
Low Income
78.75%
1.25%
1.25%
6.25%
20.00%
6.25%
1.25%
Lower Middle Income
75.75%
13.23%
5.03%
14.02%
14.90%
24.87%
2.38%
Upper Middle Income
46.53%
5.41%
5.02%
39.96%
17.57%
1.16%
2.32%
High Income
22.19%
4.18%
4.18%
59.49%
18.01%
7.72%
3.54%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
% of respondents
Who pays for your treatment? 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
271 
 
 
Figure 6. Employment status of patients with thalassaemia who responded to TIF survey 2022-2023 by country 
income level. 
 
Pre-transfusion Hb 
The majority of patients living in low-income countries report that are transfused when their haemoglobin 
drops below 7mg/dl (Figure 7), indicative of prolonged fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, dizziness or 
headaches that have a negative impact on the quality of life and cause cognitive and intellectual impairment. 
About one third of respondents living in lower middle and upper middle-income countries face the same 
challenges and are at risk to develop anaemia-related disabilities. 
 
Figure 7. Quality of provided healthcare services by country income level, by pre-transfusional haemoglobin level 
Employed,
working full-
time
Employed,
working part-
time
Not
employed,
looking for
work
Not
employed,
NOT looking
for work
Retired
Disabled, not
able to work
No Answer
Low Income
13.80%
12.50%
32.50%
11.30%
1.30%
28.80%
0%
Lower Middle Income
20.50%
9.20%
26.90%
33.40%
1.30%
6.90%
1.90%
Upper Middle Income
26.40%
7.90%
25.50%
18.70%
1.20%
17.60%
2.70%
High Income
32.80%
10.30%
19.00%
9.30%
15.10%
12.20%
1.30%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
% of respondents
Which of the following categories best describes your employment status? 
Less than 7mg/dl
8-9mg/dl
10-11mg/dl
Over 11mg/dl
No Answer
Low Income
51.30%
36.30%
1.30%
8.80%
2.50%
Lower Middle Income
25.60%
42.90%
18.40%
8.20%
4.90%
Upper Middle Income
21.60%
61.40%
8.10%
5.20%
3.70%
High Income
14.50%
40.20%
27.30%
11.30%
6.80%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
% of Respondents
If regularly transfused, what is the usual Hb level prior transfusion?
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
272 
Serum ferritin 
According to TIF Guidelines, chelation therapy should be started after about one year of chronic transfusions 
that correlates with a serum ferritin of approximately 1,000 ng/mL [19]. This means that people with 
thalassaemia who have a ferritin level higher than the 1,000 ng/mL threshold are not properly chelated. This is 
the case for more than half of the thalassaemia population living in low income, lower middle income and upper 
middle-income countries, while patients living in high income countries report being appropriately chelated 
(Figure 8). Given that access to chelation drugs is essential to confine comorbidities linked to iron overload and 
that the majority of the global thalassaemia population lives in developing countries, it is evident that the 
majority of patients do not have access to chelation therapy and are thus prone to develop a wide range of 
disabilities. 
 
Figure 8. Serum ferritin concentration 
 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2* 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2* technique is used to assess iron overload in the heart, liver and pancreas 
of thalassaemic patients. It is a useful tool to evaluate the efficiency of iron chelators and monitor the health 
status of patients. In contrast to high-income countries, the vast majority of respondents from all other country 
income groups was never tested with the said technology (Figure 9). The majority of those tested globally had 
results lower than 20 ms (normal) which calls for the revision of thalassaemia clinical management protocols to 
effectively remove excess iron (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 9. Access to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2* 
<500ng/ml
501-
1000ng/ml
1001-
2000ng/ml
2001-
4000ng/ml
>4001ng/ml
I don't know
No Answer
Low Income
2.50%
2.50%
11.30%
28.80%
26.30%
27.50%
1.30%
Lower Middle Income
8.80%
14.40%
23.80%
24.80%
17.90%
8.80%
1.50%
Upper Middle Income
6.60%
13.90%
21.00%
21.20%
22.40%
12.50%
2.30%
High Income
22.50%
27.30%
16.40%
9.00%
6.80%
14.80%
3.20%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
% of Respondents
Your current ferritin level is:
Twice a year
Annually/ Every
year
Every 2 years
Rarely
Never
No Answer
Low Income
5.00%
3.80%
3.80%
22.50%
63.80%
1.30%
Lower Middle Income
4.40%
22.50%
7.60%
13.80%
49.20%
2.60%
Upper Middle Income
11.00%
12.20%
5.00%
22.60%
46.10%
3.10%
High Income
5.10%
33.10%
18.30%
20.60%
17.40%
5.50%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
% of Respondents
How often is cardiac iron measured by T2*?
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
273 
 
Figure 10. Reported T2* value 
 
Liver Iron Concentration 
Elevated liver iron concentration is a marker of increased comorbidities in patients with beta thalassaemia. 
Survey respondents reported not being sure of aware of this marker, which indicates the need for disease-
specific education globally (Figure 11). 
 
Figure 11. Reported liver iron concentration value by country income level 
 
Under 6ms
7-10ms
11-20ms
Over 20ms
No Answer
Low Income
16.30%
26.30%
8.80%
16.30%
32.50%
Lower Middle Income
14.20%
14.60%
8.30%
9.30%
53.50%
Upper Middle Income
18.90%
22.40%
7.50%
6.90%
44.20%
High Income
20.90%
16.40%
8.40%
17.00%
37.30%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
% of Respondents
What is your latest T2* level?
Less than 7
mg/kg of dry
weight
8-15 mg/kg of
dry weight
Above 16 mg/kg
of dry weight
I am not sure
I don't know
No Answer
Low Income
0
3.80%
2.50%
22.50%
70.00%
1.30%
Lower Middle Income
5.30%
4.20%
2.60%
14.10%
68.30%
5.40%
Upper Middle Income
3.30%
2.70%
1.40%
15.10%
70.80%
6.80%
High Income
16.10%
7.40%
3.20%
22.50%
47.90%
2.90%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
% of Respondents
What is your latest Liver Iron Concentration?
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
274 
Comorbidities 
Survey respondents have verified that people with thalassaemia face, indeed, multiple challenges and 
comorbidities related to both their physical and mental health, as they need to visit different medical specialties 
at different intervals to address disease-related issues (Figure 12). 
 
Figure 12. Reported medical specialists visited by income level 
 
Days lost from education/work 
Losing days from school or work to receive treatment has a great impact on each patient’s psychology and level 
of social integration. The vast heterogeneity of realities is depicted in the below table, with the majority of 
patients losing productive time of more than 16 days per year for treatment. Interestingly, inequalities exist 
even between patients living in high income countries, as one third of respondents does not lose any days from 
school or work for treatment purposes (Figure 13). 
 
Figure 13. Number of days lost from education or work for treatment per year by income level 
Heart specialist
Endocrinologist
Diabetologist (If
different)
Psychologist
Liver specialist
Nephrologist
No Answer
Low Income
33.75%
21.25%
8.75%
12.50%
18.75%
16.25%
30.00%
Lower Middle Income
35.71%
27.25%
11.29%
6.08%
15.43%
6.70%
42.42%
Upper Middle Income
32.82%
20.85%
7.53%
5.02%
21.43%
10.81%
34.56%
High Income
53.70%
42.44%
15.76%
11.25%
20.58%
11.90%
28.62%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
% of Respondents
What specialist(s) do you visit, in addition to your main treating doctor?
None
1-5 days
6-10 days
11-15 days
16 or more
days
No Answer
Low Income
12.50%
11.30%
6.30%
22.50%
47.50%
0%
Lower Middle Income
13.20%
16.60%
4.90%
24.50%
34.60%
6.30%
Upper Middle Income
21.80%
12.20%
6.00%
10.60%
44.60%
4.80%
High Income
33.40%
10.30%
5.50%
10.90%
35.40%
4.50%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
35.00%
40.00%
45.00%
50.00%
% od Respondents
How many days per year do you lose from education or work because of having 
to attend treatment for thalassaemia?
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
275 
 
DISCUSSION 
TIF’s Perspective 
Disabilities may be general and common to many diseases, particularly chronic ones, but may also be disease-
specific, e.g. due to transfusion-related infections, iron-related organ damage or osteopenia or osteoporosis, 
the latter considered as old-age complications but appear to people with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia 
from a very young age. Given that affected patients in countries with optimal medical and social care are ageing 
[1], new disease-related disabilities are emerging that cannot be neglected or excluded from any policy 
addressing the needs of the thalassaemia community. 
 
While it is clear that the appearance of disabilities in thalassaemia depends on the quality of care and provision 
of social benefits to ease adherence to treatment and social integration, countries have not yet focused on how 
to improve the access of people with thalassaemia to appropriate health and social care. Despite having signed 
or ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [35] and even addressing the needs of the 
ageing thalassaemics through disability acts and other policies, national healthcare systems are still to be 
strengthened, and social care services still need to become aware of the complexity of thalassaemia and why 
patients need individualised assessment and tailored measures to be active parts of society. These on account 
of the disorder’s nature, genetic background, complicated pathophysiology and consequently its vastly 
heterogeneous clinical outcome that requires personalised, tailored to individual management needs, for which 
the key responsibility lies with the long-term treating specialist. Such complexity hence calls for targeted policy 
measures, so that no person with thalassaemia is left behind. 
 
For all the above reasons, TIF has built on the ICF definition and developed a Disability Risk Assessment Model 
for Thalassaemia (DRAM-Thal) to provide national competent authorities with a tool to recognise disabilities in 
thalassaemia and successfully assess each individual case, based on personal and social factors. The DRAM-Thal 
may serve as (i) a statistical tool in the collection and recording of outcome data; (ii) a research tool; (iii) a 
measure for needs assessment, vocational assessment and for planning rehabilitation services; (iv) a social 
policy tool in social security planning, affecting legislation development; (v) an educational tool. 
In the thalassaemia syndromes, whether an impairment develops, or function is affected depends on several 
factors that extent from the healthcare system to patients themselves. These factors may be used to assess the 
risk and status of disability: 
 
Accessibility of health care 
If a child is not treated or treated poorly due to limited access to treatment, with transfusions given at a low 
haemoglobin level, there is impaired function and fatigue due to anaemia, and in time bone deformities, 
fractures and extramedullary haemopoiesis which may cause pressure on vital structures such as the spinal 
canal and nerves. Later in life, poor iron chelation can lead to organ failure causing heart disease, liver and 
endocrine damage. 
 
 
 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
276 
Quality of health care 
The quality of healthcare services may be assessed through a set of clinical features, including each patient’s: 
• 
Age: Without close monitoring and regular treatment, beta thalassaemia may cause serious organ 
damage and be life threatening. With multidisciplinary care, people are likely to live into their 50s, 60s 
and beyond but with the risk to develop multiple disability-inducing comorbidities. 
• 
Pre-transfusional haemoglobin: A level of 9.0-10.5 g/dl has been shown to promote normal growth, 
allow normal physical activities, adequately suppress bone marrow activity and minimise transfusional 
iron accumulation [19]. 
• 
Serum ferritin: It generally correlates with body iron stores and is relatively easy and inexpensive to 
determine repeatedly. Serum ferritin is most useful in identifying trends: an increasing trend implies 
an increasing iron burden that requires further clinical investigation. 
• 
Cardiac iron concentration: T2* is an MRI technique to measure liver and cardiac iron, recommended 
as part of yearly monitoring of multi-transfused patients at risk of developing myocardial or liver iron 
loading. It requires shorter acquisition times and allows the early identification of patients at high risk 
of developing organ deterioration and complications. 
• 
Liver iron concentration (LIC): It is measured to identify whether body iron is adequately controlled, 
as it is linked to the risk of hepatic/ extrahepatic damage. Normal LIC values are up to 1.8 mg/g dry wt, 
with levels of up to 7 mg/g dry wt seen in some non-thalassaemic populations without apparent 
adverse effects. Sustained high LIC (above 15-20 mg/g dry wt) have been lined to worsening prognosis, 
liver fibrosis progression or liver function abnormalities. The most common methods to measure LIC 
is through biopsy, SQUID and MRI. 
• 
Splenectomy: If the clinical management of transfusion-dependent thalassaemia is inadequate, the 
increased destruction of red blood cells by reticuloendothelial system, in particular by the spleen, 
results in its enlargement (splenomegaly). Splenectomy, the surgical removal of the spleen is a 
treatment option with major adverse effects, including sepsis, thrombophilia, pulmonary 
hypertension and Iron overload [19], affecting both the survival and quality of life of patients. 
• 
Comorbidities: Bone disease is common at all ages, causing pain, fractures (osteopenia, osteoporosis) 
and limiting mobility. Iron overload causes a number of co-morbidities including vascular disease (deep 
vein thrombosis and cerebrovascular events), pulmonary hypertension, heart cardiomyopathy leading 
to heart failure; pituitary damage leading to hypogonadism, growth retardation, and delayed puberty; 
endocrine complications, namely diabetes, hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism; liver disease, 
namely fibrosis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, particularly if concomitant chronic hepatitis is 
present. Arthralgia, infections and neurological deficits may appear, such as paraparesis and 
paraplegia with effects on mobility, paraesthesia, stroke. The presence of these co-occurring 
conditions should be regarded as causing disability. 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
277 
The social environment in which the patient lives and the social 
determinants of health 
For people with chronic diseases, including thalassaemia and sickle cell disease, the social determinants of 
health are crucial for their overall health status, as ageing fully exposes patients to social factors and is linked 
to the appearance of a number of disabilities [1]. The social determinants of health (SDH) are the non-medical 
factors that influence health outcomes. They are the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and 
age that follow a social gradient: the lower the socioeconomic position, the worse the health. The factors that 
determine the socioeconomic position are the income and social protection; education; unemployment and job 
insecurity; working life conditions; food insecurity; housing; basic amenities and the environment; early 
childhood development; social inclusion and non-discrimination; structural conflict; access to affordable health 
services of decent quality. These have been analysed in a separate Chapter of the Global Thalassaemia Review. 
 
Pain level 
The degree of pain experienced is usually related to bone disease but is of multifactorial aetiology. The main 
manifestations are osteoporosis and fractures, as well as deformities. Whatever the cause of pain, it will affect 
quality of life but also social function and may lead to depression and other mental health issues. 
 
Mental health concerns: The DRAM-thal model 
Patients with thalassemia may have at least one psychological disorder, such as depression, anxiety, 
psychosomatic illness, social problems and isolation. 
The above parameters may be assessed using a scoring-based system, with 1 point being given to satisfactory 
outcomes and 3 to poor outcomes, either clinical or social. In DRAM-Thal (Table 2), Column A includes patients 
who receive optimal or nearly optimal medical care and appropriate social support and have very confined 
chances of developing disabilities. Columns B and C include patients who are most likely to develop disabilities 
to different extents. These patients receive less than optimal to inappropriate medical care and weak to very 
poor social care and protection. 
Acknowledging that medical and social care need to act synergistically for optimal outcomes, we suggest the 
integration of a disease-specific classification system into the disability assessment criteria of each country to 
assess each patient’s risk to develop a disability based on their clinical perspective or status and potential health 
outcomes and best address their needs. The suggested scoring model could substantially ease national 
competent authorities in disability assessment, as people with a High and Very High-risk level are deemed more 
and particularly vulnerable and in need of strengthened social support. Given that the vast majority of people 
with thalassaemia lives in low and lower middle-income countries and have a poor clinical image, according to 
literature and TIF Survey findings, immediate action needs to be taken for the benefit of such a vulnerable 
population. 
 
 
 
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
278 
Table 2. Disability Risk Assessment Model for Thalassaemia (DRAM-Thal) (proposed by TIF) 
 
 
A
B
C
1 point
2 points
3 points
No Risk
Moderate Risk
Severe Risk
None, Absent, 
Negligible
Medium, Fair
High, Extreme
Good Clinical 
Perspective
Moderate Clinical 
Perspective
Poor Clinical 
Perspective
1
Multidisciplinary Care: When professionals from a range of 
disciplines work together to deliver comprehensive care that 
addresses as many of the patient's needs as possible.
Essential Health Care: For thalassaemia, it comprises of 
regular blood transfusions and chelation therapy.
Free Access to 
Multidisciplinary Care 
through Universal Health 
Coverage or Insurance-
based systems
Free Access to 
Essential Health Care + 
Paid Access to 
Multidisciplinary Care
Limited / No Access to 
Essential Health Care
2
i
Age
While disability risk increases with age, it is considered 
inevitable if patients are undertreated, at any age.
<30 years old
30-45 years old
>45 years old
ii
Pre-transfusion Hb
A pre-transfusion haemoglobin of 9.0-10.5 g/dl has been 
shown to promote normal growth, allow normal physical 
activities, adequately suppress bone marrow activity and 
minimise transfusional iron accumulation.
9.0-10.5 g/dl
7.0-9.0 g/dl
<7 mg/dl
iii
Serum Ferritin
Serum ferritin (SF) generally correlates with body iron stores, 
and is relatively easy and inexpensive to determine 
repeatedly. Serum ferritin is most useful in identifying trends: 
an increasing SF trend implies an increasing iron burden that 
requires further clinical investigation.
<1000 mg/L
1001-3000 mg/L
>3000 mg/L
iv
Cardiac MRI T2*
T2* is an MRI technique to measure liver and cardiac iron, 
recommended as part of yearly monitoring of multi-
transfused patients at risk of developing myocardial or liver 
iron loading. It requires shorter acquisition times and allows 
the early identification of patients at high risk of developing 
organ deterioration and complications.
>20 ms
10-15 ms
<10ms
v
LIC
Liver iron concentration (LIC) is measured to identify whether 
body iron is adequately controlled, as it is linked to the risk of 
hepatic/ extrahepatic damage. Normal LIC values are up to 
1.8 mg/g dry wt, with levels of up to 7 mg/g dry wt seen in 
some non-thalassaemic populations without apparent 
adverse effects. Sustained high LIC (above 15-20 mg/g dry 
wt) have been lined to worsening prognosis, liver fibrosis 
progression or liver function abnormalities. The most 
common methods to measure LIC is through biopsy, SQUID 
and MRI.
<7 mg/gdw
7-10 mg/gdw
>11 mg/gdw
vi
Splenectomy
If the clinical management of transfusion-dependent 
thalassaemia is inadequate, the increased destruction of red 
blood cells by reticuloendothelial system, in particular by the 
spleen, results in its enlargement (splenomegaly). 
Splenectomy, the surgical removal of the spleen is a 
treatment option with major adverse effects, including Sepsis, 
Thrombophilia, Pulmonary hypertension and Iron overload, 
affecting both the survival and quality of life of patients.
No
Yes
vii
Co-morbidities
Iron overload causes a number of co-morbidities including 
vascular disease, pulmonary hypertension, heart 
cardiomyopathy leading to heart failure; pituitary damage 
leading to hypogonadism, growth retardation, and delayed 
puberty; endocrine complications, namely diabetes, 
hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism; liver disease, 
namely fibrosis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, 
particularly if concomitant chronic hepatitis is present. Bone 
disease is common at all ages, causing pain, fractures 
(osteopenia, osteoporosis) and limiting mobility. The 
presence of these co-occurring conditions should be 
regarded as causing disability.
None
1-2
2+
Disability Risk 
Assessment Model
for Thalassaemia
Calculate points to assess risk level
Accessibility of Healthcare
Quality of Health Care Services
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
279 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Disabilities can be diverse and intersect with one another, while their impact on an individual's life can vary 
widely. Thalassaemia encompasses all types of disability that may manifest at any age, if a patient is poorly 
treated or develops multiple comorbidities due to ageing. Where people with thalassaemia have free and 
unrestrictive access to quality multidisciplinary care, they have a better quality of life, an increased lifespan, less 
complications and are less prone to develop any type of disability. The TIF Disability Risk Assessment Model for 
Thalassaemia may serve as a compass for national authorities to improve disease-specific policies. 
Nonetheless, to better understand how each stakeholder perceives the correlation of thalassaemia and 
disability, more data on national settings and policies is needed.
3
i
Days lost from school per year
None
5-15 days
16+ days
ii
Days lost from work per year 
(over and above annual statutory or contractual sick 
leave entitlement)
None
5-15 days
16+ days
iii
Access to social protection allowances
Yes
Partly
No
iv
Financial Situation
Satisfactory
Poor
Very Poor
v
Level of social integration
High
Moderate
Low
4
Pain Scale
1 to 3: Mild and minor pain that is noticeable and possibly 
distracting.
4 to 6: Moderate to moderately strong pain that is enough to 
disrupt normal daily activities.
7 to 10: Debilitating, intense pain that prevents a person from 
living a normal life.
1-3
4-6
7-10
5
Co-appearance of mental health issues
a. Depression
b. Stress/Anxiety
c. Psychosomatic issues
d. Isolation
1 issue 
(a or b or c or d)
Any combination 
of 2 issues (a-d)
Any combination
of >2 issues (a-d)
<10
11-20
>20
Medium
High
Very High
Total Number of Points
SCORING SCALE
Risk to develop disability
Risk Level
Mental Health Concerns
Social Determinants of Health
Pain Level
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
280 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Farmakis D, Giakoumis A, Angastiniotis M, 
Eleftheriou A. The changing epidemiology 
of the ageing thalassaemia populations: A 
position statement of the Thalassaemia 
International Federation. Eur J Haematol. 
2020;105:16-23. 
 
2. Lal A. Assessment and treatment of pain 
in thalassemia. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2016;1368:65-72.  
 
3. 
Tartaglione I, Carfora R, Brotto D, Barillari 
MR, Costa G, Perrotta S, Manara R. 
Hearing 
Loss 
in 
Beta-Thalassemia: 
Systematic 
Review. 
J 
Clin 
Med. 
2022;11:102.  
 
4. Klonizakis P, Roy N, Papatsouma I, Mainou 
M, Christodoulou I, Pantelidou D, Kokkota 
S, Diamantidis M, Kourakli A, Lazaris V, 
Andriopoulos D, Tsapas A, Klaassen RJ, 
Vlachaki 
E. 
A 
Cross-Sectional, 
Multicentric, Disease-Specific, Health-
Related Quality of Life Study in Greek 
Transfusion 
Dependent 
Thalassemia 
Patients. Healthcare (Basel). 2024;12:524.  
 
5. Tedone F, Lamendola P, Lopatriello S, 
Cafiero D, Piovani D, Forni GL. Quality of 
Life and Burden of Disease in Italian 
Patients 
with 
Transfusion-Dependent 
Beta-Thalassemia. J Clin Med. 2022;11:15.  
 
6. Angastiniotis M, Christou S, Kolnakou A, 
Pangalou E, Savvidou I, Farmakis D, 
Eleftheriou A. The Outcomes of Patients 
with Haemoglobin Disorders in Cyprus: A 
Joined Report of the Thalassaemia 
International Federation and the Nicosia 
and Paphos Thalassaemia Centres (State 
Health 
Services 
Organisation). 
Thalassemia Reports. 2022;12:143-156.  
7. 
WHO (2001) International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). 
WHO Publishing, Geneva. 
 
8. Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities and Optional Protocol, United 
Nations 
2006. 
At: 
https://www.un.org/disabilities/documen
ts/convention/convoptprot-e.pdf 
(accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
9. Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control 
and 
Prevention 
– 
Disability. 
At 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityan
dhealth/disability.html (accessed on Sep 
1, 2024). 
 
10. ICF Checklist - Clinician Form. At: 
https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-
source/classification/icf/icfchecklist.pdf?s
fvrsn=b7ff99e9_4&download=true 
(accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
11. World 
Health 
Assembly 
Resolution 
(WHA58.23) 2005 - "Disability, including 
prevention, 
management 
and 
rehabilitation". 
At: 
https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/
WHA58/WHA58_23-en.pdf (accessed on 
Sep 1, 2024). 
 
12. Australian 
Government 
- 
List 
of 
Recognised 
Disabilities. 
At: 
https://www.dss.gov.au/our-
responsibilities/disability-and-
carers/benefits-payments/carer-
allowance/guide-to-the-list-of-
recognised-disabilities (accessed on Sep 1, 
2024). 
 
13. United Arab Emirates - Disability Act. At: 
https://gulfnews.com/uae/thalassaemia-
patients-included-in-the-act-1.154220 
(accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
14. India - The Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities 
Act 
2016: 
At 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
281 
https://www.tezu.ernet.in/PwD/RPWD-
ACT-2016.pdf  
 
15. Panhellenic Association for the Protection 
of Sickle Cell and Micro Sickle Cell 
Anaemia Patients - List of Benefits. At: 
https://www.syppadremia.gr/%CE%BD%
CE%BF%CE%BC%CE%BF%CE%B8%CE
%B5%CF%83%CE%AF%CE%B1/%CF%8
0%CE%B1%CF%81%CE%BF%CF%87%C
E%AD%CF%82-
%CE%B5%CF%80%CE%B9%CE%B4%CF
%8C%CE%BC%CE%B1%CF%84%CE%B1
/ (accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
16. Hellenic Republic - Ministry of Labour and 
Social 
Affairs: 
At: 
https://ypergasias.gov.gr/koinoniki-
allilengyi/atoma-me-anapiria/ (accessed 
on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
17. United States of Americs - Social Security 
Administration: 
At: 
https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/l
nx/0423022931 (accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
18. United Kingdom - Personal Independence 
Payment. 
At: 
https://www.gov.uk/pip 
(accessed on Sep 1, 2024). 
 
19. Farmakis D, Porter J, Taher A, Domenica 
Cappellini M, Angastiniotis M, Eleftheriou 
A. 
2021 
Thalassaemia 
International 
Federation 
Guidelines 
for 
the 
Management of Transfusion-dependent 
Thalassemia. Hemasphere. 2022;6:e732. 
 
20. Pinto VM, Poggi M, Russo R, Giusti A, Forni 
GL. Management of the aging beta-
thalassemia 
transfusion-dependent 
population - The Italian experience. Blood 
Rev. 2019;38:100594.  
 
21. Motta I, Mancarella M, Marcon A, Vicenzi 
M, Cappellini MD. Management of age-
associated 
medical 
complications 
in 
patients with β-thalassemia. Expert Rev 
Hematol. 2020;13:85-94.  
22. Farmakis D, Triposkiadis F, Lekakis J, 
Parissis 
J. 
Heart 
failure 
in 
haemoglobinopathies: pathophysiology, 
clinical phenotypes, and management. 
Eur J Heart Fail. 2017;19:479-489. 
 
23. Limpawattana P, Juntararuangtong T, 
Teawtrakul 
N, 
Wanitpongpun 
C, 
Lanamtieng T, Phiphitaporn P, Chansung 
K. Cognitive Impairment in Thalassemia 
and Associated Factors. Dement Geriatr 
Cogn Disord. 2022;51(2):128-134.  
 
24. Taher A., Musallam K., Cappellini, M.D. 
(editors), Guidelines for the Management 
of 
Non-Transfusion-Dependent 
β-
Thalassaemia (3rd edition – 2023), Nicosia: 
Thalassaemia International Federation; 
2023. 
 
25. Aessopos A, Farmakis D, Karagiorga M, 
Voskaridou E, Loutradi A, Hatziliami A, 
Joussef J, Rombos J, Loukopoulos D. 
Cardiac 
involvement 
in 
thalassemia 
intermedia: a multicenter study. Blood. 
2001;97:3411-3416. 
 
26. Noureldine MHA, Taher AT, Haydar AA, 
Berjawi A, Khamashta MA, Uthman I. 
Rheumatological complications of beta-
thalassaemia: 
an 
overview. 
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018;57:19-27.  
 
27. Kremastinos 
DT, 
Farmakis 
D. 
Iron 
overload 
cardiomyopathy 
in 
clinical 
practice. Circulation. 2011;124:2253-2263.  
 
28. Tsironi M, Korovesis K, Farmakis D, 
Deftereos S, Aessopos A. Hypocalcemic 
heart failure in thalassemic patients. Int J 
Hematol. 2006 May;83(4):314-317. 
 
29. Aessopos A, Karabatsos F, Farmakis D, 
Katsantoni A, Hatziliami A, Youssef J, 
Karagiorga M. Pregnancy in patients with 
well-treated beta-thalassemia: outcome 
for mothers and newborn infants. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 1999;180:360-365.  
DISABILITY IN THALASSAEMIA 
282 
30. Aessopos A, Kati M, Tsironi M, Polonifi E, 
Farmakis D. Exchange blood transfusions 
for the treatment of leg ulcerations in 
thalassemia intermedia. Haematologica. 
2006;91:ECR11.  
 
31. Taher A, Isma'eel H, Mehio G, Bignamini 
D, 
Kattamis 
A, 
Rachmilewitz 
EA, 
Cappellini 
MD. 
Prevalence 
of 
thromboembolic events among 8,860 
patients with thalassaemia major and 
intermedia in the Mediterranean area and 
Iran. Thromb Haemost. 2006;96:488-491. 
 
32. Aessopos A, Farmakis D, Karagiorga M, 
Rombos 
I, 
Loucopoulos 
D. 
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum lesions and 
cardiac complications as contributing 
factors for strokes in beta-thalassemia 
patients. Stroke. 1997;28:2421-2424.  
 
33. Aessopos A, Kati M, Farmakis D. Heart 
disease in thalassemia intermedia: A 
review of the underlying pathophysiology. 
Haematologica. 2007;92:658-665. 
 
34. World Bank – Classification of Countries 
by 
Income: 
At: 
https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/kno
wledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-
country-and-lending-groups (accessed on 
Sep 1, 2024). 
 
35. United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of 
Persons 
with 
Disabilities. 
At: 
https://www.un.org/disabilities/documen
ts/convention/convention_accessible_pdf
.pdf (accessed on Sep 1, 2024 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
283 
 
 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
284 
10. ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., Antoniou E., Ascanio M., Darbà J., Eleftheriou A. & Farmakis D. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Health funders, including governments, social insurance funds and companies or even patients themselves, are 
now more than ever struggling to cover the increasing costs of medical treatments and especially novel ones, 
including gene- and cell- based therapies and other approaches targeting erythropoiesis for patients with 
thalassaemia. The cost of therapy does not though only include medication and blood transfusion costs but also 
hospitalisations, laboratory and diagnostic tests, medical consultations, treatment of side effects or 
complications and other indirect costs, such as travel expenses and loss of productive days. 
 
 
 
This analysis would help national associations and patient advocates to justify: i) why affected countries should 
have a national prevention policy in place to control the number of new births and thus the economic costs of 
the disease; ii) why these countries should invest in the holistic (optimal) care of patients to help them achieve 
good health and thus contribute to society; and iii) why affected countries should assess the financial burden 
for better planning and management of available resources to avoid healthcare waste and determine whether 
access to novel (expensive) therapies would be possible. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
To elaborate a cost model for thalassaemia, we engaged both a highly qualified team of Health Economists 
from BCN Health, a small-sized enterprise based in Barcelona, Spain and a team of medical experts on 
thalassaemia from Cyprus and Greece. The project consisted of three (3) distinct stages: 
1. 
TARGETED LITERATURE REVIEW. The team would first review existing literature to identify: 
i. 
which countries have already performed a cost-of-illness study on thalassaemia. 
ii. 
what components have been taken into consideration for the estimation of treatments costs. 
2. GENERIC COST-OF-ILLNESS MODEL. The team would then prepare a cost-of-illness breakdown 
analysis in Excel format, reviewed by the team of medical experts. 
3. 
PILOTING. The team would finally apply to the Model data collected from two (2) countries (one of the 
Western world and one of the Eastern world) to the cost-of-illness table. 
Through this study, we aim to provide health funders, researchers, either academic or medical, and 
patients themselves with a cost model for thalassaemia that would contribute to better planning, 
allocation of resources and reduction of waste in health care. This would initiate a well-structured and 
evidence-based dialogue of patient associations with national health authorities to help them 
understand the rising needs of thalassaemia and the need for policy change. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
285 
 
More specifically: 
1. 
TARGETED LITERATURE REVIEW 
Countries that have performed COI studies on thalassaemia 
Cost analysis for thalassaemia therapy bears several limitations, including the diverse structure and 
organization of healthcare systems and social security services in high-prevalent and other countries across the 
world, the variable level and intensity of provided services, the different degree of healthcare coverage and the 
difficulty to estimate amount of out-of-pocket money that many patients and families have to pay in several 
countries. Evidence in the literature remains also limited and is based on diverse methods of cost calculation, a 
fact that renders comparisons among studies and countries problematic. 
Cost analyses have focused either on the total cost of thalassaemia care or on the cost and, more often, the 
cost-effectiveness of specific treatment or prevention modalities, such as iron chelation, haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT) or prenatal screening. The findings of key studies on thalassaemia care cost in 
different parts of the world are summarized below. 
 
General Cost of Thalassaemia Therapy 
In the UNITED STATES, a retrospective matched-cohort study using payer claims estimated an average total 
healthcare costs per patient per year for regularly transfused patients of USD 128,062 (versus USD 5,438 for 
matched controls, p< 0.0001) [1, 2]. In UNITED KINGDOM, according to a model constructed on information 
obtained from literature review and clinicians, the estimated total healthcare expenditure for the management 
of thalassaemia was  £483,454 ($720,201) at 2013-2014 prices over the first 50 years of patients’ life [3, 4]. In 
INDIA, a survey performed in a tertiary hospital by interviewing patients’ guardians estimated an average total 
expenditure per patient per year of US$ 1135, including direct and indirect costs, an amount representing 38.8% 
of the family income [5, 6]. In SRI LANKA, according to an analysis based on medical records, physicians’ 
consultation and patients and families’ interviews, the average total cost per patient year to the hospital was 
$US 2601, including direct and overhead costs, while the average household expenditure was $US 206 [7, 8]. In 
IRAN (ISLAMIC REP. OF), a cost analysis from a social services perspective estimated an average cost per 
patient per year of $ 8321.8, including direct and indirect costs, plus another $ 1360.5 due to the distress caused 
by the disease [9, 10]. In ISRAEL, the total cost for treating one thalassaemia patients for 50 years was 
estimated at $1,971,380 [11, 12]. In a recent poster presentation from EGYPT, the total cost of treating 
thalassaemia is 1432 USD/patient/year; this takes into consideration direct, indirect and direct non-medical 
costs, with the highest cost going to medications and monitoring; the authors suggest that even with public 
sector insurance patients and families suffer a high financial burden due to co-payments, given the average 
salary which is 586 US Dollars per month [13, 14]. 
In the UAE a cost of illness study confirmed that direct medical costs and especially iron chelation are the most 
resource demanding features of thalassaemia management. The direct medical cost per annum was 131156 
AED (35,709.11 USD) per patient per year. This is contrasted to the estimates from Egypt, even though there 
may be differences in the items included in the estimate. The authors of the UAE cost estimate included the 
following (Fig 1.) 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
286 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of the direct medical costs per TDT patient by medical service types, 2019 
The median household annual income in the UAE is 26,137.38 USD (contrast to 7032 for Egypt). Over and above 
there are direct non-medical costs [15, 16]. The same authors also study productivity loss due to thalassaemia; 
they reported the annual total productivity loss cost at paid work among 79 employed patients was USD 4691, 
out of which absenteeism contributed USD2812 and presenteeism contributed USD 1879, whereas the annual 
total productivity loss cost at unpaid work was USD 1104 [2, 17]. 
Malaysia: The lifetime cost per TDT patient was calculated to be USD 606,665; this is the sum of lifetime 
healthcare cost and lifetime patient and family healthcare expenditure.  This is based on information obtained 
from published literature and clinicians involved in managing TDT in Malaysia, while lifetime patients/family 
healthcare expenditure was derived through face-to-face interviews (a total of 574 patients were recruited) in a 
nationwide multi-centre cross-sectional study using a set of de novo questionnaires, in 12 major thalassemia 
centres covering all regions in Malaysia between May and September 2018. The costs included ICT drugs, blood 
transfusion, routine laboratory and instrumental monitoring tests, and iron overload complications. The annual 
cost to manage a TDT patient is substantial at USD 10,499 from a societal perspective while the monthly 
estimated mean total patient and family resource use is USD65.56. The Malaysia healthcare system is publicly 
funded; hence scarce resources limit the feasibility of meeting all patient requirements. This information is of 
interest to policymakers [4, 18]. 
 
Cost of Screening and Prevention 
Applying population or premarital screening and prenatal diagnosis programmes was demonstrated to be a 
cost-effective strategy in other highly prevalent areas such as IRAN (ISLAMIC REP. OF). Study reports savings 
of 7,825,000 USD in 10 years due to the screening programme applied in that country, considering 235 
6.90%
1.30%
59.80%
3.40%
1.60%
26.10%
0.90%
TDT Medical Costs
Laboratory investigations
Radiology and other diagnostic
investigations
Iron-Chelation Therapy
Other medications
Consultations
Nlood transfusion
Surgical and other therapies
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
287 
prevented cases in 10 years [6, 19]. In a more recent study from Iran, the costs of preventing the birth of each 
thalassaemia major patient were US$ 32 624 by screening techniques while the cost of managing a patient with 
thalassemia major is about US$ 136 532 per year. Incremental cost per QALY gained with screening as compared 
with managing thalassaemia major was US$ 11 571. In conclusion screening is a long-term value for money 
intervention that is highly cost effective and its long-term clinical and economic benefits outweigh those of 
managing thalassaemia major patients [8, 20]. In CHINA the savings in one year were HK$2651 in 2004 [10, 21] 
and US$356,499 in 2016 [22, 23]. A study from ISRAEL reported savings of $67,369 per birth prevented in 1998 
[24, 25]. A more recent study also in Israel reported that the prevention of 45 affected newborns over a ten-year 
period represents a net saving of $88.5 million to the health budget. Even after deducting the cost of the 
prevention programme ($413.795/year), the programme still represents a benefit of $76 million over ten years 
[11, 12]. 
 
Cost of Specific Therapeutic Modalities 
Estimating the cost of transfusion therapy may be challenging as there are several implicated processes. In 
Australia, the total cost per packed red cell unit, covering every step of the transfusion pathway for 
thalassaemia patients, was estimated at US$ 695.59 from a healthcare provider perspective [22]. 
Regarding iron chelation therapy, a series of studies performed in different countries including United 
Kingdom, Italy, Iran (Islamic Rep. of), China, Taiwan (China), Thailand, and United States, used Markov 
models to determine the lifetime cost and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) to compare the cost effectiveness 
of different iron chelators; results varied according to the time period of the study and the applied comparisons 
among available iron chelators [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35]. – which of these? 
In what concerns curative therapies, the estimated average costs for HSCT and gene therapy in France were 
€215,571 and €608,086, respectively [36]. Using Markov modelling, two different studies in India and in Thailand 
showed that HSCT was a highly cost-effective strategy in the long-term compared with conventional 
transfusion-chelation therapy [37, 38]. 
 
IDENTIFICATION OF PARAMETERS TO ESTIMATE THE 
COST OF CARE 
 
Treatment Costs 
The β-thalassaemia treatment costs identified for different countries were estimated on the basis of the same 
set of components, namely:  
a) Blood transfusion costs 
b) Pharmaceutical drugs 
c) Disposables 
d) Iron load monitoring 
e) Disease progression and complications 
f) 
Laboratory testing 
g) Medical consultations and multidisciplinary care 
h) Infection management 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
288 
Table 1 below summarises all parameters identified in literature with regard to treatment costs in general: 
 
Table 1. Summary of parameters identified from the literature 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Weiss M, et al. 2019 
 
USA 
- 
Medication 
- 
Medical 
- 
Outpatient 
- 
Inpatient 
- 
ED 
- 
Other medical 
Udeze C et al  
J Med Econ 2023 
USA 
Direct costs (as above) per patient/year 
Weidlich D, et al. 2016 
(Transfusion) 
United Kingdom 
- 
RBC transfusion 
- 
ICTs 
- 
Routine monitoring tests and regular 
visits to haematologists 
- 
Managing complications 
Moirangthem A, et al. 
(Ind J Pediatr 2018) 
India 
- 
Hospital admission and BT 
- 
Travel related 
- 
Medications 
- 
Lab investigations 
- 
Mean annual income 
Uchil A et al  
(Natl Med J INDIA 2023) 
India  
Direct costs 
Reed-Embleton H, et al. 2020 
Sri Lanka 
Blood transfusion: 
- 
Number of transfusions 
- 
Staff 
Drug therapy: 
- 
ICT 
- 
Concomitant medication 
Overheads: 
- 
Indirect costs 
Household costs: 
- 
Transport and foods 
Hossein  et al 
Orphanet J OF RARE DIS 2017 
Bangladesh 
Direct costs annual 
Safdar S et al  
Pak J Med Res 2017 
Pakistan 
Direct 
Indirect costs/ patient/year 
Nhac-Vu HT et al 
Plos One 2023 
Vietnam 
Direct costs/patient/year 
Zhen X et al 
ORPHANET J OF RARE DIS 2023 
 
China 
Mean annual direct costs 
Shafie AA et al 
BMC Pediatr 2020 
Malaysia 
Direct costs 
Overhead costs 
Atmakusuma TD et al  
Int J of Gen Med 2021 
Indonesia 
Cost/person /year 
Esmaeilzadeh F, et al. 2016 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
- 
Total costs per patient 
- 
Direct medical costs 
- 
Direct non-medical costs 
- 
Indirect costs 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
289 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Geitona M et al 
Value Health . 2014 
Greece 
Direct costs 
Koren A et al 
Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis 
. 2014 
Israel  
Lifetime costs 
Antmen A et al 
Blood 2017 
Turkey 
Annual direct costs 
Angelucci E et al 
Blood 2017 
Italy 
- 
Direct costs TDT 
- 
Direct costs NTDT  
Alabbadi I et al 
Jord J Pharm Sci 2022 
Jordan  
- 
Direct and Indirect costs 
- 
Subsidised and unsubsidised 
 
Blood Transfusion Services 
Data about red blood cell (RBC) transfusion costs in beta-thalassaemia patients is scarce. We were able, though, 
to identify the main parameters involved in RBC transfusion costs, as outlined below in Table 2: 
Table 2. Parameters of transfusion costs in beta-thalassaemia patients 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
McQuilten ZK, et al. 2019 
Australia 
- 
Number of RBC units transfused 
- 
Staff costs 
- 
Consumables costs 
- 
Transfusion process costs 
- 
RBC procurement costs 
Burns KE, et al. 2019 
Australia 
- 
Red blood cell (RBC) unit cost 
- 
Costs 
associated 
with 
clinical 
transfusion processes 
- 
Costs 
of 
laboratory 
transfusion 
(pathology) processes 
- 
Costs of full blood count and ferritin 
assays performed 
- 
Costs of clinical transfusion processes 
- 
Costs for management of iron overload 
- 
Medical therapy unit expenses and 
overheads 
Ravangard R, et al. 2018 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
Direct medical costs: 
- 
Medicine 
- 
Blood transfusion 
- 
Visit 
- 
Laboratory 
- 
Diagnostic and treatment services 
- 
Hospitalization 
Direct non-medical costs: 
- 
Transportation 
- 
Accommodation and food 
Indirect costs: 
- 
Potential production lost due to being 
absent from work to receive medical 
care 
 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
290 
Iron Chelation 
Most of the studies identified were cost-effectiveness or cost-utility studies comparing different chelators’ cost 
and their effectiveness. Several studies (China, Italy, United Kingdom and Thailand) compared deferoxamine 
(DFO), deferiprone (DFP) and deferasirox (DFX). The parameters identified in literature to calculate the costs of 
the different chelation therapies are as follows: 
Table 3. Parameters used to calculate costs of chelation therapies 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Saiyarsarai P, et al. 2020 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
- 
Direct medical cost: included the cost 
of medicine and laboratory 
- 
Cost of medical equipment and infusion 
pump 
- 
Annual cost of cardiac complication 
- 
Indirect costs: transfusion time cost, 
cost of productivity loss 
Li J, et al. 2020 
China 
- 
Chelator costs 
- 
DFO administration cost 
- 
Monitoring cost 
- 
Complications therapy cost 
Pepe A, et al. 2017 
Italy 
- 
Drug costs 
- 
DFO administrations costs 
- 
Monitoring tests 
Vekeman F, et al. 2016 
USA 
- 
Inpatient stays 
- 
Emergency room (ER) visits 
- 
Outpatient visits 
- 
All-cause healthcare costs 
- 
Disease-related healthcare costs 
Bentley A, et al. 2013 
United Kingdom 
- 
Drug costs 
- 
Administration 
costs 
(DFO 
and 
combination therapy) 
- 
Monitoring tests 
- 
Managing treatment-related adverse 
events 
Keshtkaran A, et al. 2013 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
- 
Direct costs: drug, pump, transfusion 
kit cost and treatment of adverse 
events 
- 
Indirect costs: transfusion time cost 
Ho Wl, et al. 2013 
Taiwan (China) 
- 
Drug costs 
- 
Administration costs 
- 
Adverse events costs 
Karnon J, et al. 2012 
United Kingdom 
- 
Chelation drug 
- 
Administration 
- 
Monitoring 
- 
Adverse events 
- 
Complications 
Luangasanatip N, et al. 2011 
Thailand 
- 
Direct medical care 
*DFO costs: drug cost, cost of medical 
visit, cost of infusion pump and cost of 
injection set 
*DFP costs: drug cost, cost of medical 
visit, cost of complete blood count (CBC) 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
291 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
monitoring and cost of neutropenia 
treatment 
- 
DSX: drug cost and cost of 
medical visit 
- 
Direct non-medical care 
- 
Indirect costs 
Zhang B, et al. 2011 
USA 
Treatment with DFO 
Delea Te, et al. 2007 
USA 
- 
Drug costs 
- 
Administration costs 
- 
Complications 
Lee Ta, et al. 2014 
Worldwide 
Drug costs 
Li J, et al. 2019 
Worldwide 
Literature review that provides all the 
costs included in each study 
 
Disease Progression – Complications 
Thalassaemia syndromes lead to some complications in several systems including cardiopulmonary disorders, 
endocrine organ diseases, liver impairment and thromboses in different vascular beds. The main complications 
identified in the literature review were the following: 
Table 4. Parameters of the costs of caring for complications of thalassaemia 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Farmakis D, et al. 2020 
Worldwide 
Cardiovascular disorders 
- 
Atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular 
disease 
- 
Atrial fibrillation 
- 
Aortic stenosis 
- 
Heart failure with preserved left 
ventricular ejection 
- 
Fraction 
- 
Supraventricular arrhythmias 
- 
Diastolic left ventricular dysfunction 
Hepatic disorders 
- 
Hepatocellular carcinoma 
- 
Hepatitis C infection 
- 
Hepatic 
epithelioid 
hemangioendothelioma (related to 
iron overload) 
Demosthenous C, et al. 2019 
Worldwide 
- 
Epidemiology of renal complications 
- 
Renal manifestations 
- 
Tubular dysfunction 
- 
Glomerular dysfunction 
- 
Haematuria 
- 
Nephrolithiasis 
Sinakos E, et al. 2017 
Greece 
- 
Chronic liver diseases, namely liver 
cirrhosis 
and 
hepatocellular 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
292 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
carcinoma, are currently the main 
causes of death in patients with b-
TM. 
- 
CHC along with iron overload are the 
main reasons for the progression of 
liver disease in this population. 
- 
SVR could also lead to prolongation 
of life expectancy in b-TM patients. 
Ozturk Z, et al. 2017 
Turkey 
- 
Hypozincaemia 
- 
Copper deficiency and toxicity 
- 
Deficiency of selenium 
- 
Hypomagnesaemia 
- 
Calcium 
Karimi M, et al. 2018 
Worldwide 
- 
Osteoporosis (21.6%) 
- 
Hypogonadism (12.6%) 
- 
Central hypothyroidism (8.3%) 
- 
Non-insulin-dependent 
diabetes 
mellitus (7.8%) 
- 
Primary hypothyroidism (5.5%) 
- 
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(4.2%) 
- 
Hypoparathyroidism (2.2%) 
- 
Growth hormone deficiency (1.1%) 
- 
Adrenal mass (1%) 
- 
Thyroid cancer (0.5%) 
Fung Eb, et al. 2016 
 
- 
Low bone mass: 60%–-85% of adults 
- 
Growth deficiency 
- 
Diabetes 
Finianos A, et al. 2018 
 
- 
Incidence of HCC: 1.02% 
- 
Risk factors for the development of 
HCC: 
iron 
overload 
and 
viral 
hepatitis with or without cirrhosis. 
- 
Recommendation 
of 
screening 
patients with: 
- 
Liver 
iron 
concentration 
(LIC) 
measurement by means of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) 
- 
Liver ultrasound 
- 
HCC in thalassemia risk factors: 
hepatitis B, cirrhosis and iron 
overload. 
- 
Nontransferrin-bound 
free 
iron 
(NTBFI) and ferritin are associated 
with 
impaired 
immunity 
by 
impairing lymphocyte proliferation 
and 
tumoricidal 
activity 
of 
macrophages. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
293 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
- 
There have been no randomised 
trials looking at HCC management 
interventions 
in 
thalassaemic 
patients. 
Pepe A, et al. 2019 
Italy 
- 
Cardiac complications: 13.1% of the 
patients (heart failure, arrhythmias, 
pulmonary 
hypertension, 
myocardial 
infarction, 
angina, 
myo/pericarditis, peripheral vascular 
disease) 
Yang G, et al. 2014 
China 
- 
Myocardial iron overload: 33.8% 
- 
Severe myocardial iron overload: 
12.6% 
- 
Left Ventricle Ejection Fraction 
(LVEF): 64% 
De Sanctis V, et al. 2019 
Worldwide 
- 
Central 
hypothyroidism: 
4.8% 
(adults) 
0.5 
(children 
and 
adolescents) 
- 
Thyroid cancer: 0.44% (adults) 
- 
Latent 
hypocortisolism: 
1.3% 
(adults) 
4.4% 
(children 
and 
adolescents) 
- 
GH deficiency: 3.2%(adults) 4.5% 
(children and adolescents) 
Farmakis D, et al. 20 1749 
Worldwide 
- 
Chronic haemolysis 
- 
Left ventricular dysfunction 
- 
Vascular disease 
- 
Myocardial ischaemia 
- 
Myocarditis 
- 
Pulmonary hypertension 
- 
Right ventricular dysfunction 
- 
Angina 
- 
Arrhythmias 
- 
Valvular abnormalities 
Tartaglione I, et al. 2020 
Italy 
- 
Headache: 38.2% 
- 
No more common or severe than in 
the general population. 
Mettananda S, et al. 2020 
Sri Lanka 
- 
Abnormal emotional: 18% 
- 
Conduct: 17% 
- 
Hyperactivity: 9% 
- 
Peer relationship symptom: 14% 
 
 
 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
294 
Screening and Prevention 
Screening and prenatal diagnosis are used to reduce the number of new thalassaemia births and the related 
costs. The following table summarises the parameters identified in the different studies: 
Table 5. Parameters of prenatal screening and diagnosis 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Ahmadnezhad E, et al. 20 12 
Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
- 
Cost of providing optimum 
care 
- 
Prevention costs 
- 
Cases prevented in 10 years 
- 
Savings 
Bryan S, et al. 2011 
United Kingdom 
- 
Carrier test (woman) 
- 
Carrier test (father) 
- 
Carrier 
status 
counselling 
(woman only) 
- 
Carrier 
status 
counselling 
(couple) 
- 
PND 
- 
TOP counselling 
- 
TOP procedure 
Leung Ky, et al. 2004 
China 
- 
Screening 
- 
Follow-up 
- 
Total screening programme 
- 
Savings 
Yang Y, et al. 2016 
China 
- 
Non-invasive PND program 
- 
Invasive programme 
- 
Savings 
Ginsberg G, et al. 1998 
Israel 
- 
Lifetime healthcare costs 
- 
Lost earnings 
- 
Premature mortality 
- 
Prevention program 
- 
Savings 
Koren A, et al. 2014 
Israel 
- 
Cost of preventing one affected 
new-born 
- 
Treatment of a patient during 
50 years 
 
Curative Therapies 
The curative therapies considered were the gene therapy and the HSCT. The average costs reported by the 
French study were €608,086 for patients treated by gene therapy and €215,571 for patients treated by HSCT. A 
study conducted in Thailand compared the costs of blood transfusion iron chelation therapy (BT-ICT) treated 
patients with reduced intensity HSCT (RI-HSCT). The results reported that the costs for BT-ICT were US$ 73,928 
and costs for RI-HSCT were US$ 114,000. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
295 
Table 6. Parameters of assessing costs of curative therapies 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
John Mj, et al. 2018 
India 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 
- 
Cost incurred after HSCT(MRD) 
- 
Cost incurred after HSCT(MUD) 
- 
Cost incurred in treating cGVHD  
Transfusion Chelation 
- 
Cost 
of 
managing 
cardiac 
complications 
- 
Cost 
of 
managing 
liver 
complications 
- 
Cost of managing endocrine 
complications 
Coquerelle S, et al. 2019 
France 
Hospital professionals 
- 
Laboratory 
technician 
for 
production 
- 
Laboratory 
quality 
control 
technician 
- 
Nurse (FDI) 
- 
Laboratory engineer 
- 
Laboratory 
quality assurance 
manager (pharmacist) 
- 
Doctor 
- 
Laboratory director 
- 
Ambulatory 
medical 
consultations 
Tests performed 
- 
Haematological analysis 
- 
Genetic chimerism 
Treatments 
- 
Cyclosporine 
- 
Mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept 
) 
Sruamsiri R, et al. 2013 
Thailand 
- 
Direct medical cost 
- 
Direct non-medical cost 
- 
Indirect cost 
 
Productivity Loss 
There is a lack of data on measuring productivity loss in patients with thalassaemia. Only two abstracts were 
identified: one providing information about quality of life and one about productivity. The latter showed that 
3% of thalassaemia population reported absenteeism, 30% presenteeism, work productivity loss of 38% and 
50% of activity impairment. 
 
 
 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
296 
Table 7. Parameters of assessing loss in work productivity 
Article 
Country 
Parameters 
Wong Jhy, et al. 2019 
Malaysia 
- 
Lifetime healthcare cost 
- 
Lifetime patient and family 
healthcare expenditure 
- 
Total 
lifetime 
transfusion 
dependent thalassaemia cost 
Shah F, et al. 2019 
United Kingdom 
- 
EQ-5D-3L utility scores 
- 
EQ-5D-3L VAS scores 
- 
WPAI (%) 
- 
TranQoL 
- 
TranQoL domain scores 
 
The components that contribute to the estimation of the cost of thalassaemia were defined taking into account 
the results of the literature review, as outlined further above. The most common parameters found for the 
different countries were selected to be included in a generic cost model and then validated by the team’s 
medical experts. 
 
Generic Cost-of-Illness Model 
Following the targeted Literature Review, the team created a Generic Cost-of-Illness (CoI) Model (henceforth 
“the Model”) on Microsoft Excel that would apply to all settings, whether local or national. The parameters 
identified were grouped and categorised to render the Model user friendly. The following seven tabs were 
created, the content of which will be analysed further below: 
1. 
AFFECTED POPULATION 
 1.1 Transfusion-Dependent Thalassaemias (TDT) 
 1.2 Non-Transfusion-Dependent Thalassaemias (NTDT) 
2. MEDICAL CARE COSTS (OUTPATIENT SERVICES) 
 2.1 Blood Transfusion Services 
 2.2 Pharmaceutical Drugs 
 2.2.1 Iron Chelators 
 2.2.2 Commonly Used Pharmaceutical Drugs 
 2.2.3 Other Pharmaceutical Drugs 
 2.3 Disposables 
 2.4 Iron Load Monitoring 
 2.5 Disease progression / Treatment-related testing 
 2.6 Laboratory Testing 
 2.7 Medical Consultations / Multidisciplinary Care 
 2.8 Infection Management 
       i. Other Costs 
       ii. Indirect Costs / Productivity Loss 
       iii. Prevention Costs 
       iv. Summary of Results 
       v. References 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
297 
3. 
PILOTING 
To verify that the Model is indeed comprehensive and useful for patient advocates and governments, 
the team applied data from two countries: the United Kingdom and Iran (Islamic Rep. of). The 
completed Model was then shared with TIF experts in both countries for validation purposes. No 
further modification or change was suggested. 
 
RESULTS 
The Generic COI Model 
The Model is TIF’s contribution in global patient advocacy, as the estimation of the annual costs of thalassaemia 
treatment and care will allow evidence-based policymaking in all countries affected with thalassaemia across 
the world. The Model consists of seven tabs with different colours to differentiate which need to be completed 
by the users. Tabs in GREY are informative; tabs in GREEN and BLUE need data input from the user; the tab in 
RED automatically calculates results and the last tab provides in GREY provides a space to note down data 
sources and other reference documents. 
 
Figure 2. The CoI Model in Microsoft Excel 
The Cover Page allows the user to select the country through a drop-down menu, the level of data, whether 
local, regional or national and the year of reference, as shown below: 
 
Figure 3. The CoI Model’s Cover Page 
Country 
Austria
Select your country
Level
National
Select the level of data
Year of reference
2020
BCN HEALTH
Travessera de Gracia 62, 5-6
08006 Barcelona (Spain)
Tel: + 34 93 209 18 65
Mail: enquiries@bcnhealth.com 
COST MODEL FOR THE CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
OF THALASSAEMIA
ENTER
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
298 
The How-to-Use tab provides key information on the Model’s content and the type of data needed to complete 
it: 
 
Figure 4. How to use the Cost Model 
In the next tab, entitled “1. Affected Population”, the user needs to introduce the number of transfusion- or non-
transfusion-dependent thalassaemia patients taken into account for the estimation of costs. The Model uses 
the sum of the two values entered for calculation purposes: 
 
Figure 5. Affected population 
Next, under “2. Treatment-related Costs”, the user needs to fill in two different columns, one dedicated to costs 
(per unit, visit, package, etc.) and one dedicated to quantities used in a year. All data entered in the second 
column needs to be annual. To calculate the total cost per year per parameter, the Model multiplies the cost per 
unit (Column 1) with the corresponding quantities (Column 2). There is no need to fill in all parameters, as 
different parameters apply in each country. The Model lists all parameters that need to be present for the 
provision of optimal health care services to patients. 
HOW TO USE THE COST MODEL
A.   The Model consists of the following seven (7) tabs:
                     1.   Affected Population
                           1.1. Transfusion-Dependent Thalassaemias (TDT)                     
                           1.2. Non-Transfusion-Dependent Thalassaemias (NTDT)
                     2.   Treatment-related Costs
                           2.1. Blood Transfusion Services
                           2.2. Pharmaceutical Drugs
                                  2.2.1. Iron Chelators
                                  2.2.2. Commonly Used Pharmaceutical Drugs
                                  2.2.3. Other Pharmaceutical Drugs
                           2.3. Disposables
                           2.4. Iron Load Monitoring
                           2.5. Disease progression / Treatment-related testing
                           2.6. Laboratory Testing
                           2.7. Medical Consultations / Multidisciplinary Care
                           2.8. Infection Management
                     3.   Other Costs
                     4.   Indirect Costs / Productivity Loss
                     5.   Prevention
                     6.   Summary of Results
                     7.   References
B.   To fill-in the different tabs you need two (2) types of data:
                     -        Cost per Unit (i.e. package, pill, vial, visit, working hour, etc.)
                     -        Number of Units used
C.   You may select which tabs you want to fill in, as per the data available or special interest in a specific data
      category. If you fill in all tabs, you will have a realistic estimation of the costs related to the clinical management
      of thalassaemia.
Affected population
Cover page
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
299 
 
Figure 6. Treatment-related costs 
2.1. Blood Transfusion Services
Cost per Unit
No of Units Used 
(per Annum)
Total Cost
2.1.1. ABO, Rh compatibility kits
0
2.1.2. Cross-matching donor/recipient
0
2.1.3. Red cell transfusion - Component separation
0
2.1.4. Pre-storage filtration
0
2.1.5. Bedside filtration
0
2.1.6. Washed red blood cells (e.g. cost of saline)
0
2.1.7. Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al) - 
Serological (blood donor)
0
2.1.8. Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al) - 
NAT testing (blood donor)
0
2.1.9. Transportation
0
2.1.10. Test for other TTIs (e.g. malaria, etc)
0
2.1.11. Storage (Addition of nutrients and additive 
solutions)
0
2.1.12. Personnel costs
0
2.1.13. Other […]
0
2.1.14. Other […]
0
0
2.2. Pharmaceutical Drugs
Cost per Package
No of Packages Used
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Deferoxamine (Desferal®) 500 mg
0
Deferoxamine (Desferal®) 2 g
0
Deferoxamine (generic) 500 mg
0
Deferoxamine (generic) 2 g
0
Deferiprone (Ferriprox®) 500 mg
0
Deferiprone (Ferriprox®) 1000 mg
0
Deferiprone (Ferriprox®) Oral Solution 100 mg/mL
0
Deferiprone (generic) 500 mg
0
Deferiprone (generic) 1000 mg
0
Deferasirox (Exjade® / Asunra®) 125 mg
0
Deferasirox (Exjade® / Asunra®) 250 mg
0
Deferasirox (Exjade® / Asunra®) 500 mg
0
Deferasirox New Formulation (EMA / Jadenu® FDA) 90 mg
0
Deferasirox New Formulation (EMA / Jadenu® FDA) 180 mg
0
Deferasirox New Formulation (EMA / Jadenu® FDA) 360 mg
0
Deferasirox (generic - e.g. Mylan, Accord)
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
0
Insulin
0
Folic acid
0
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
0
Calcium / Vitamin D
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
TOTAL 
Please complete all highlighted /coloured cells, as appropriate.
NB: 
- To calculate personnel costs, please insert a median salary / wage (monthly or annual) under “Cost per Unit”.
- Please use information that is available and reliable in your setting.
2.2.1. Iron Chelators
2.2.3. Other Pharmaceutical Drugs (e.g. Management of Complications)
2.2.2. Commonly Used Pharmaceutical Drugs
2.2.1.2. Deferiprone
2.2.1.1. Deferoxamine
TOTAL
2.2.1.3. Deferasirox
TOTAL
TOTAL
2. TREATMENT-RELATED COSTS
0
Other costs
Affected population
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
300 
 
Figure 7. Treatment-related costs (contd.) 
 
2.3. Disposables
Cost per Unit
No of Units Used
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Infusion pump - Mechanical (deferoxamine-related)
0
Infusion pump - Balloon (deferoxamine-related)
*Ongoing Costs
0
Infusion pump - Electronic (deferoxamine-related)
0
Injection kit (e.g. thalasets)
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
2.4. Iron Load Monitoring
Cost per Test
No of Tests Permormed 
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
MRI (Heart Measurements)
0
MRI (Liver Measurements)
0
Serum ferritin
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
2.5. Disease progression / 
Treatment-related testing
Cost per Unit
No of Tests Done
Total Cost
DEXA
0
Abdominal Ultrasound
0
Fibroscan
0
Echocardiogram
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
2.6. Laboratory Testing
Cost per Test
No of Tests Performed 
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Complete Blood Count
0
Liver Function Tests (LFT)
0
Renal Function Tests (RFT)
0
T3, free T4, TSH
0
Parathyroid Hormone (PTH)
0
Calcium, ionized calcium
0
Fasting glucose
0
Glucose tolerance test
0
IGF-1, IGF BP-3
0
LH-ICMA
0
FSH
0
Estradiol
0
Vitamin D
0
Zinc test
0
Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al) - Serological 
(Patients)
0
Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al) - NAT testing 
(Patients)
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
2.7. Medical Consultations / Multidisciplinary Care
Cost per Visit
No of Visits
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Cardiologist
0
Opthalmologist
0
ENT (Audiometry)
0
Endocrinologist
0
Hepatologist
0
Other […]
0
0
2.8. Infection Management
Cost per Pill or Package
No of Pills or Packages 
Used (Per Annum)
Total Cost
Prophylactic antibiotics (e.g. penicillin)
0
Vaccine (Streptococcus pneumoniae)
0
Vaccine (Haemophilus influenzae type B)
0
Vaccine (Neisseria meningitides)
0
Vaccine (Influenza virus)
0
Other […]
0
Other […]
0
0
0
TOTAL
TOTAL TREATMENT-RELATED COSTS
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
TOTAL
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
301 
Next, under “Other Costs”, the user needs to enter data not directly related to treatment, such as any state-
provided benefits or allowances: 
 
Figure 8. Other costs 
 
Data on productivity loss needs to be entered under “4. Indirect Costs”. To calculate productivity loss, the user 
needs to introduce under “Cost per Unit” the cost of a day of work and under “No of Units Used (per Annum)”, 
the mean number of days that a patient with thalassaemia is absent from work. To calculate the total costs 
linked to productivity loss, the number of patients is multiplied by the number of days missed and then by the 
cost of a day of work. 
 
 
Figure 9. Indirect costs (productivity loss) 
The CoI Model may also estimate the cost of prevention, under “5. Prevention Costs”. This amount is not 
considered part of the cost of treatment calculations. 
3. OTHER COSTS
3. Other Costs
Cost per Person
No of Beneficiaries
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Transportation Allowance
0
Subsistence Allowance 
(Accommodation & Food)
0
Disability Benefit
0
Unemployment Benefit
0
Other […]
0
0
TOTAL 
Please complete all highlighted /coloured cells, as appropriate.
Indirect costs
Treatment-related costs
4. INDIRECT COSTS
 
4. Indirect Costs
Cost per Unit
No of Units Used
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Productivity Loss
0
Other […]
0
0
TOTAL 
Please complete all highlighted /coloured cells, as appropriate.
NB:
- Please insert a median salary / wage (per day) under “Cost per Unit”.
- Please insert the median number of work days that a patient loses in a year under “No of Units Used”.
Prevention costs
Other costs
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
302 
 
Figure 8. Prevention costs 
 
The results are automatically calculated under “6. Summary of Results”. Besides the totals for each parameter 
of costs, the user may also view an estimation of the annual cost of treatment per patient. 
 
Figure 9. Summary of results 
A last tab (“7. References) has been created to enter any reference documents or other details useful to the user 
or justifying the data used: 
5. PREVENTION COSTS
5. Prevention
Cost per Unit
No of Units Used
(Per Annum)
Total Cost
Carrier test
0
Genetic Counselling
0
Prenatal diagnosis
0
Termination of pregnancy procedure
0
Awareness-raising activities
0
Screening and prevention programme
0
0
TOTAL 
Please complete all highlighted/coloured cells, as appropriate.
Summary of results
Indirect costs
6. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
Treatment-related Costs
0
   Blood Transfusion Services
0
   Pharmaceutical Drugs
0
      Iron Chelators
0
      Commonly Used Pharmaceutical Drugs
0
      Other Pharmaceutical Drugs
0
   Disposables
0
   Iron Load Monitoring
0
   Disease progression / Treatment-related Testing
0
   Laboratory Testing
0
   Medical Consultations / Multidisciplinary Care
0
   Infection Management
0
Other Costs
0
Indirect costs / Productivity Loss
0
TOTAL COSTS
0
ANNUAL COST / PATIENT
#DIV/0!
Prevention Costs
0
References
Prevention costs
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
303 
 
Figure 10. References 
 
Application of Data/Piloting 
To verify that the Model is functional, the team entered published data found in literature for the United 
Kingdom and Iran (Islamic Rep. of). The two countries were selected based on geography and the amount of 
published data available. In the United Kingdom, the annual cost of thalassaemia care amounts to 81,796 GBP, 
while in Iran (Islamic Rep. of) this is estimated at 18,777 IRR (equal to 9,951.20 GBP). 
 
Figure 11. Comparative table – United Kingdom and Iran (Islamic Rep. of) 
 
 
 
 
7. REFERENCES
(This can be used to create a table summarizing unit costs)
Blood Transfusion Services
Unit Cost 
Source
ABO, Rh compatibility kits
0.00
Cross-matching donor/recipient
0.00
Red cell transfusion - Component separation
0.00
Pre-storage filtration
0.00
Bedside filtration
0.00
Washed red cells
0.00
Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al) 
1. Serological
0.00
Test for TTIs (HCV, HBV, HIV, syphilis et al)
2. NAT testing
0.00
Transportation
0.00
Test for other TTIs (e.g. malaria, etc)
0.00
Storage (Addition of nutrients and additive solutions)
0.00
Personnel costs
0.00
Other […]
0.00
Other […]
0.00
Cover page
Summary of results
UK
IRAN
in Pound Sterling (GBP)
in Iranian Rial (IRR)
Affected Population
1564
18777
Treatment-related Costs
109,230,917
247,596,902
   Blood Transfusion Services
14,440,287
48,111,744
   Pharmaceutical Drugs
53,617,048
182,991,254
      Iron Chelators
53,617,048
182,991,254
      Commonly Used Pharmaceutical Drugs
0
0
      Other Pharmaceutical Drugs
0
0
   Disposables
15,155,160
7,809,354
   Iron Load Monitoring
0
0
   Disease progression / Treatment-related Testing
0
0
   Laboratory Testing
328,158
2,056,269
   Medical Consultations / Multidisciplinary Care
18,705,440
6,628,281
   Infection Management
6,984,824
0
Other Costs
0
3,049,573
Indirect costs / Productivity Loss
18,697,902
7,672,658
TOTAL COSTS
127,928,819
258,319,132
ANNUAL COST / PATIENT
81,796
13,757
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
304 
CONCLUSION 
TIF proceeded to the development of a CoI Model for Thalassaemia to quantify the burden of thalassaemia on 
health systems and allow decision makers to translate the adverse effects of thalassaemia into monetary terms, 
the universal language of decision makers and the policy arena. TIF anticipates that these estimates will be 
used to: i) define the magnitude of the disease in financial terms in different settings; ii) justify intervention 
programmes; iii) assist in the allocation of funding and resources on thalassaemia management; iv) 
provide a basis for policy and planning with regard to prevention and control; and v) provide an economic 
framework for the evaluation of existing thalassaemia control and management programmes [39]. 
Such a model, simple in inception but powerful in execution, may be used to help affected countries include 
thalassaemia in policy planning and address the imminent research gap on this specific topic. It may also be 
used by health authorities, health partnerships and consortia both nationally and transnationally to identify 
needs and address them. Moreover, it is a powerful advocacy tool for the implementation of prevention 
strategies and the reduction of new affected births. 
In comparative studies, it important to take into account a set of parameters that may affect the cost of the 
disease, including labour costs, equipment and supplies costs and the availability thereof. The comparison 
between the United Kingdom and Iran (Islamic Rep. of) may help a policy expert identify what works well and 
what not in each setting and what corrective measures need to be taken. 
 
 
 
Such a model may also be of added value in any discussion on the introduction of new medicines or 
therapies into national essential or advanced medicines’ lists and formularies. An estimation of the 
annual cost for the treatment of thalassaemia per patient is expected to allow governments to 
determine each product’s or therapy’s return in investment and thus the provision of access to such 
products or therapies would be informed and evidence-based, for the benefit of the patient. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
305 
REFERENCES 
1. 
S. L. James et al., ‘Global, regional, and 
national incidence, prevalence, and years 
lived with disability for 354 diseases and 
injuries for 195 countries and territories, 
1990–2017: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2017’, The 
Lancet, vol. 392, no. 10159, pp. 1789–1858, 
Nov. 
2018,doi: 
10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)32279-7. 
2. M. Weiss, M. Parisi Jun, and S. Sheth, 
‘Clinical and economic burden of regularly 
transfused 
adult 
patients 
with 
β-
thalassemia in the United States: A 
retrospective cohort study using payer 
claims’, Am. J. Hematol., vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 
E129–E132, 2019,doi: 10.1002/ajh.25429. 
3. 
X. Xu and X. Wu, ‘Epidemiology and 
treatment of beta thalassemia major in 
China’, Pediatr. Investig., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 
43–47, 
Mar. 
2020,doi: 
10.1002/ped4.12154. 
4. D. Weidlich, P. Kefalas, and J. F. Guest, 
‘Healthcare costs and outcomes of 
managing β-thalassemia major over 50 
years in the United Kingdom’, Transfusion 
(Paris), vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1038–1045, 
2016,doi: 10.1111/trf.13513. 
5. M. Angastiniotis, J.-L. Vives Corrons, E. S. 
Soteriades, and A. Eleftheriou, ‘The 
Impact of Migrations on the Health 
Services for Rare Diseases in Europe: The 
Example of Haemoglobin Disorders’, Sci. 
World J., vol. 2013, no. 1, p. 727905, 
2013,doi: 10.1155/2013/727905. 
6. A. Moirangthem and S. R. Phadke, ‘Socio-
demographic 
Profile 
and 
Economic 
Burden of Treatment of Transfusion 
Dependent 
Thalassemia’, 
Indian 
J. 
Pediatr., vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 102–107, Feb. 
2018,doi: 10.1007/s12098-017-2478-y. 
7. 
S. Jameela et al., ‘Thalassaemia screening 
among students in a secondary school in 
Ampang, Malaysia’, Med. J. Malaysia, vol. 
66, pp. 522–4, Dec. 2011. 
8. H. Reed-Embleton et al., ‘A cost-of-illness 
analysis of β-Thalassaemia major in 
children in Sri Lanka – experience from a 
tertiary level teaching hospital’, BMC 
Pediatr., vol. 20, no. 1, p. 257, Dec. 
2020,doi: 10.1186/s12887-020-02160-3. 
9. D. 
Farmakis, 
A. 
Giakoumis, 
M. 
Angastiniotis, and A. Eleftheriou, ‘The 
changing epidemiology of the ageing 
thalassaemia populations: A position 
statement 
of 
the 
Thalassaemia 
International 
Federation’, 
Eur. 
J. 
Haematol., vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 16–23, Jul. 
2020,doi: 10.1111/ejh.13410. 
10. F. Esmaeilzadeh et al., ‘Economic Burden 
of Thalassemia Major in Iran, 2015’, J. Res. 
Health Sci., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 111–115, Aug. 
2016. 
11. B. Allaf et al., ‘Appropriate thresholds for 
accurate screening for β-thalassemias in 
the newborn period: results from a French 
center for newborn screening’, Clin. 
Chem. Lab. Med. CCLM, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 
209–216, Jan. 2021,doi: 10.1515/cclm-
2020-0803. 
12. A. Koren et al., ‘Prevention of β 
Thalassemia in Northern Israel - a Cost-
Benefit Analysis’, Mediterr. J. Hematol. 
Infect. Dis., vol. 6, no. 1, p. e2014012, Feb. 
2014,doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2014.012. 
13. S. de Silva et al., ‘Thalassaemia in Sri 
Lanka: implications for the future health 
burden of Asian populations’, The Lancet, 
vol. 355, no. 9206, pp. 786–791, Mar. 
2000,doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(99)08246-
X. 
14. I. Anan, A. El-Beshlawy, N. Shaheen, A. 
William, and A. Khalifa, ‘EE609 The Cost of 
Beta Thalassemia Major Disease From 
Patient Perspective in Egypt’, Value 
Health, vol. 25, no. 12, p. S175, Dec. 
2022,doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2022.09.848. 
15. I. Mustafa et al., ‘Genetic epidemiology of 
beta-thalassemia in the Maldives: 23 years 
of a beta-thalassemia screening program’, 
Gene, vol. 741, p. 144544, May 2020,doi: 
10.1016/j.gene.2020.144544. 
16. S. Alshamsi, S. Hamidi, and H. O. Narci, 
‘Healthcare resource utilization and direct 
costs 
of 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia patients in Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates: a retrospective cost-of-
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
306 
illness study’, BMC Health Serv. Res., vol. 
22, no. 1, p. 304, Dec. 2022,doi: 
10.1186/s12913-022-07663-6. 
17. S. Alshamsi, S. Hamidi, and H. Ozgen 
Narci, ‘Productivity Loss and Associated 
Costs Among Patients with Transfusion-
Dependent Thalassemia in Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates’, Clin. Outcomes Res. 
CEOR, vol. 13, pp. 853–862, Sep. 2021,doi: 
10.2147/CEOR.S334724. 
18. A. A. Shafie, J. H. Y. Wong, H. M. Ibrahim, 
N. S. Mohammed, and I. K. Chhabra, 
‘Economic burden in the management of 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassaemia 
patients in Malaysia from a societal 
perspective’, Orphanet J. Rare Dis., vol. 
16, no. 1, p. 157, Dec. 2021,doi: 
10.1186/s13023-021-01791-8. 
19. E. Ahmadnezhad et al., ‘Evaluation and 
Cost Analysis of National Health Policy of 
Thalassaemia 
Screening 
in 
West-
Azerbaijan Province of Iran’, Int. J. Prev. 
Med., vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 687–692, Oct. 
2012. 
20. F. Esmaeilzadeh, B. Ahmadi, S. Vahedi, S. 
Barzegari, 
and 
A. 
Rajabi, 
‘Major 
Thalassemia, Screening or Treatment: An 
Economic Evaluation Study in Iran’, Int. J. 
Health Policy Manag., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 
1112–1119, 
Feb. 
2021,doi: 
10.34172/ijhpm.2021.04. 
21. K. Y. Leung et al., ‘Cost-effectiveness of 
prenatal screening for thalassaemia in 
Hong Kong’, Prenat. Diagn., vol. 24, no. 
11, 
pp. 
899–907, 
2004,doi: 
10.1002/pd.1035. 
22. Z. K. McQuilten et al., ‘The cost of blood: 
a study of the total cost of red blood cell 
transfusion in patients with β-thalassemia 
using time-driven activity-based costing’, 
Transfusion (Paris), vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 
3386–3395, 2019,doi: 10.1111/trf.15558. 
23. Y. Yang, D.-Z. Li, and P. He, ‘A Program on 
Noninvasive Prenatal Diagnosis of α-
Thalassemia in Mainland China: A Cost–
Benefit Analysis’, Hemoglobin, vol. 40, no. 
4, 
pp. 
247–249, 
Jul. 
2016,doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2016.1197840. 
24. K. E. Burns et al., ‘A time-driven, activity-
based 
costing 
methodology 
for 
determining the costs of red blood cell 
transfusion 
in 
patients 
with 
beta 
thalassaemia major’, Transfus. Med., vol. 
29, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
33–40, 
2019,doi: 
10.1111/tme.12523. 
25. G. Ginsberg, T. Tulchinsky, D. Filon, A. 
Goldfarb, 
L. Abramov, 
and 
E. A. 
Rachmilevitz, ‘Cost-benefit analysis of a 
national 
thalassaemia 
prevention 
programme in Israel’, J. Med. Screen., vol. 
5, no. 3, pp. 120–126, Sep. 1998,doi: 
10.1136/jms.5.3.120. 
26. P. 
Saiyarsarai, 
E. 
Khorasani, 
H. 
Photogeraphy, M. Ghaffari Darab, and M. 
Seyedifar, ‘Cost-utility of new film-coated 
tablet formulation of deferasirox vs 
deferoxamine 
among 
major 
beta-
thalassemia patients in Iran’, Medicine 
(Baltimore), vol. 99, no. 28, p. e20949, Jul. 
2020,doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000020949. 
27. J. Li, P. Wang, X. Li, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, and 
Y. Lin, ‘Cost-Utility Analysis of four 
Chelation Regimens for β-thalassemia 
Major: a Chinese Perspective’, Mediterr. J. 
Hematol. Infect. Dis., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 
e2020029, 
May 
2020,doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2020.029. 
28. A. Pepe et al., ‘Cost-Utility Analysis of 
Three 
Iron 
Chelators 
Used 
in 
Monotherapy for the Treatment of 
Chronic Iron Overload in β-Thalassaemia 
Major Patients: An Italian Perspective’, 
Clin. Drug Investig., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 453–
464, May 2017,doi: 10.1007/s40261-017-
0496-1. 
29. F. Vekeman et al., ‘Adherence to iron 
chelation 
therapy 
and 
associated 
healthcare resource utilization and costs 
in Medicaid patients with sickle cell 
disease and thalassemia’, J. Med. Econ., 
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 292–303, 2016,doi: 
10.3111/13696998.2015.1117979. 
30. A. Bentley, S. Gillard, M. Spino, J. 
Connelly, and F. Tricta, ‘Cost–Utility 
Analysis of Deferiprone for the Treatment 
of β-Thalassaemia Patients with Chronic 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
307 
Iron 
Overload: 
A 
UK 
Perspective’, 
PharmacoEconomics, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 
807–822, Sep. 2013,doi: 10.1007/s40273-
013-0076-z. 
31. A. Keshtkaran, M. Javanbakht, S. Salavati, 
A. Mashayekhi, M. Karimi, and B. Nuri, 
‘Cost–utility analysis of oral deferasirox 
versus 
infusional 
deferoxamine 
in 
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassemia 
patients’, Transfusion (Paris), vol. 53, no. 8, 
pp. 1722–1729, 2013,doi: 10.1111/trf.12024. 
32. W.-L. Ho et al., ‘A pharmaco-economic 
evaluation of deferasirox for treating 
patients with iron overload caused by 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia 
in 
Taiwan’, J. Formos. Med. Assoc., vol. 112, 
no. 4, pp. 221–229, Apr. 2013,doi: 
10.1016/j.jfma.2011.08.020. 
33. J. Karnon, K. Tolley, J. Vieira, and D. 
Chandiwana, 
‘Lifetime 
Cost-Utility 
Analyses 
of 
Deferasirox 
in 
Beta-
Thalassaemia Patients with Chronic Iron 
Overload: A UK Perspective’, Clin. Drug 
Investig., 
vol. 
32, 
Oct. 
2012,doi: 
10.1007/s40261-012-0008-2. 
34. T. E. Delea, O. Sofrygin, S. K. Thomas, J.-F. 
Baladi, P. D. Phatak, and T. D. Coates, ‘Cost 
Effectiveness 
of 
Once-Daily 
Oral 
Chelation Therapy with Deferasirox versus 
Infusional Deferoxamine in Transfusion-
Dependent 
Thalassaemia 
Patients’, 
PharmacoEconomics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 
329–342, 
Apr. 
2007,doi: 
10.2165/00019053-200725040-00005. 
35. N. Luangasanatip, N. Chaiyakunapruk, N. 
Upakdee, and P. Wong, ‘Iron-Chelating 
Therapies in a Transfusion-Dependent 
Thalassaemia Population in Thailand: A 
Cost-Effectiveness Study’, Clin. Drug 
Investig., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 493–505, Jul. 
2011,doi: 10.2165/11587120-000000000-
00000. 
36. S. Coquerelle et al., ‘Innovative Curative 
Treatment of Beta Thalassemia: Cost-
Efficacy Analysis of Gene Therapy Versus 
Allogenic 
Hematopoietic 
Stem-Cell 
Transplantation’, Hum. Gene Ther., vol. 
30, no. 6, pp. 753–761, Jun. 2019,doi: 
10.1089/hum.2018.178. 
37. M. J. John et al., ‘Cost Effectiveness of 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 
Compared with Transfusion Chelation for 
Treatment of Thalassemia Major’, Biol. 
Blood Marrow Transplant., vol. 24, no. 10, 
pp. 
2119–2126, 
Oct. 
2018,doi: 
10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.04.005. 
38. R. Sruamsiri et al., ‘Cost utility analysis of 
reduced intensity hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation in adolescence and young 
adult with severe thalassemia compared 
to hypertransfusion and iron chelation 
program’, BMC Health Serv. Res., vol. 13, 
no. 1, p. 45, Dec. 2013,doi: 10.1186/1472-
6963-13-45. 
39. D. Rice, ‘Cost of illness studies: what is 
good about them?’, Inj. Prev., vol. 6, no. 3, 
pp. 
177–179, 
Sep. 
2000,doi: 
10.1136/ip.6.3.177.
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
308 
ANNEX 
General Cost of Thalassaemia Therapy 
SUMMARY TABLE OF COST OF TREATMENT ESTIMATES ACROSS COUNTRIES: 
Country 
Total healthcare expenditure 
Prices period 
Reference 
UK 
$720,201 
$14400/year 
2013/14 prices over 50 years 
Weidlich D et al. Transfusion. 
2016 
India  
$1135/year 
Poor state coverage  
38% of family income 
Moirangthem A, Phadke SR. 
Indian J Pediatr. 2018 
India 
$ 981/year direct costs   
 
Uchil A et al Natl Med J India. 
2023 
Bangladesh  
$1632-3960 
direct 
costs/year 
according to age 
No state coverage 
Hossain et al. Orphanet Journal 
of Rare Diseases (2017) 
Pakistan  
$720 direct + indirect/p/y 
Mixed Free gov but many private 
services 
Safdar S,  
Pak J Med Res 2017 
Vietnam 
$426.7 (±294.0)/year 
2019-2021. 
Nhac-Vu HT et al. PLoS One. 
2023 
UAE 
$35,713/year/patient direct  
2019 
Alshamsi S et al. BMC Health 
Serv Res. 2022 
USA 
$137,125/year 
2010-2019.  
33-times higher total annual 
costs than matched controls 
Udeze C, et al.                J Med 
Econ. 2023  
USA 
$128,062/patient/year 
>18 years old 
Weiss M et al Am J Hematol. 
2019 
China 
mean annual direct medical cost 
estimated at $13,478 (95% CI: 
$11,538-$15,713) 
September 1, 2021, and January 
31, 2022, 
Zhen X et al. Orphanet J Rare 
Dis. 2023 
Sri Lanka  
$2601/year of which $ 2092 
direct costs and $509 overhead 
costs 
Not fully supported  
Catastrophic expenditure for 
families 
Reed-Embleton H et al. BMC 
Pediatr. 2020 
Malaysia 
$561,208 provider + $45,458 
family =$606,665 lifetime cost 
$10,499 annual cost 
2018/2019 prices 
mean age 17.3 years (SD = 10.6) 
Shafie AA et al Orphanet J Rare 
Dis. 2021 
Iran 
$8321.8 per year medical 
$ 136 532 lifetime 
 
Esmaeilzadeh F et al. Int J 
Health Policy Manag. 2022 
Indonesia 
$ 30,000/person/year 
 
Atmakusuma TD et al. Int J of 
General Medicine 2021 
Greece  
€ 32,064/year for the whole 
period; reached 32564 in 2011 
2009-2011 
Geitona M, et al. 2014  
Israel  
$1971380 lifetime 
Over 50 years 
Koren A et al 2014 
Turkey 
$ 14,360 annual direct 
 
Antmen A 2017 
Thailand  
$ 1434/TD p/year ($950 for the 
total patients mostly TI and 
children) 
2005 prices 
Riewpaiboon A et al BMC 2010 
Italy  
TM Direct: €31883 
NTDT Direct: € 31183 
 
2017 adult patients 
Angelucci E et al. Blood 2017 
Jordan  
$4458.9 subsidised 
$7196.4 unsubsidised 
Direct and indirect 
Age range 1-67, mean 18.55 
years 
Alabbadi I et al. Jord J 
Pharmaceutical Sciences 2022 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
309 
REFERENCES FOR TABLE 
• 
WEIDLICH D, KEFALAS P, GUEST JF. 
HEALTHCARE COSTS AND OUTCOMES 
OF MANAGING Β-THALASSEMIA MAJOR 
OVER 
50 YEARS 
IN THE UNITED 
KINGDOM. 
TRANSFUSION. 
2016 
MAY;56(5):1038-45. 
DOI: 
10.1111/TRF.13513. 
• 
MOIRANGTHEM A, PHADKE SR. SOCIO-
DEMOGRAPHIC 
PROFILE 
AND 
ECONOMIC BURDEN OF TREATMENT OF 
TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
THALASSEMIA. INDIAN J PEDIATR. 2018 
FEB;85(2):102-107. DOI: 10.1007/S12098-
017-2478-Y. 
• 
UCHIL A, MURANJAN M, GOGTAY NJ. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSAEMIA 
MAJOR 
RECEIVING 
HYPERTRANSFUSION THERAPY AT A 
PUBLIC HOSPITAL IN MUMBAI. NATL 
MED J INDIA. 2023 JAN-FEB;36(1):11-16. 
DOI: 10.25259/NMJI_580_20. 
• 
HOSSAIN MS, RAHEEM E, SULTANA TA, 
FERDOUS S, NAHAR N, ISLAM S, 
ARIFUZZAMAN M, RAZZAQUE MA, 
ALAM R, AZIZ S, KHATUN H, RAHIM A, 
MORSHED 
M. 
THALASSEMIAS 
IN 
SOUTH 
ASIA: 
CLINICAL 
LESSONS 
LEARNT 
FROM 
BANGLADESH. 
ORPHANET J RARE DIS. 2017 MAY 
18;12(1):93. 
DOI: 
10.1186/S13023-017-
0643-Z 
• 
SAFDAR S, MIRBAHAR A, SHEIKH MA, 
TASEER IH, MUSTAFA A, ALI Z, BASHIR F, 
FIRDOUS R, AKHTAR T. ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
THALASSEMIA 
ON 
PARENTS OF THALASSEMIC CHILDREN: 
A MULTI-CENTRE STUDY. PAK J MED RES 
JUL - SEP 2017;56(3):68-72. 
• 
NHAC-VU HT, TRAN VT, NGUYEN TD, 
PHAM VT, LE T. ECONOMIC BURDEN OF 
THALASSEMIA 
TREATMENT: 
AN 
ANALYSIS FROM THE VIETNAM SOCIAL 
SECURITY PERSPECTIVE. PLOS ONE. 
2023 
NOV 
27;18(11):E0293916. 
DOI: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0293916. 
• 
ALSHAMSI S, HAMIDI S, NARCI HO. 
HEALTHCARE RESOURCE UTILIZATION 
AND DIRECT COSTS OF TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS 
IN DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: A 
RETROSPECTIVE 
COST-OF-ILLNESS 
STUDY. BMC HEALTH SERV RES. 2022 
MAR 5;22(1):304. DOI: 10.1186/S12913-
022-07663-6. 
• 
UDEZE 
C, 
EVANS 
KA, 
YANG 
Y, 
LILLEHAUGEN T, MANJELIEVSKAIA J, 
MUJUMDAR U, LI N, ANDEMARIAM B. 
ECONOMIC AND CLINICAL BURDEN OF 
MANAGING 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT Β-THALASSEMIA IN THE 
UNITED STATES. J MED ECON. 2023 JAN-
DEC;26(1):924-932. 
DOI: 
10.1080/13696998.2023.2235928. 
• 
WEISS M, PARISI JUN M, SHETH S. 
CLINICAL AND ECONOMIC BURDEN OF 
REGULARLY 
TRANSFUSED 
ADULT 
PATIENTS WITH Β-THALASSEMIA IN THE 
UNITED STATES: A RETROSPECTIVE 
COHORT STUDY USING PAYER CLAIMS. 
AM J HEMATOL. 2019 MAY;94(5):E129-
E132. DOI: 10.1002/AJH.25429. 
• 
ZHEN X, MING J, ZHANG R, ZHANG S, XIE 
J, LIU B, WANG Z, SUN X, SHI L. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
ADULT 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
Β-THALASSAEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
MAINLAND 
CHINA. 
ORPHANET J RARE DIS. 2023 AUG 
29;18(1):252. DOI: 10.1186/S13023-023-
02858-4 
• 
REED-EMBLETON H, ARAMBEPOLA S, 
DIXON 
S, 
MALDONADO 
BN, 
PREMAWARDHENA A, ARAMBEPOLA M, 
KHAN JAM, ALLEN S. A COST-OF-
ILLNESS 
ANALYSIS 
OF 
Β-
THALASSAEMIA MAJOR IN CHILDREN IN 
SRI LANKA - EXPERIENCE FROM A 
TERTIARY LEVEL TEACHING HOSPITAL. 
BMC PEDIATR. 2020 MAY 27;20(1):257. 
DOI: 10.1186/S12887-020-02160-3. 
• 
SHAFIE AA, WONG JHY, IBRAHIM HM, 
MOHAMMED 
NS, 
CHHABRA 
IK. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
IN 
THE 
MANAGEMENT 
OF 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA PATIENTS 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
310 
IN 
MALAYSIA 
FROM A 
SOCIETAL 
PERSPECTIVE. ORPHANET J RARE DIS. 
2021 
APR 
7;16(1):157. 
DOI: 
10.1186/S13023-021-01791-8. 
• 
ESMAEILZADEH F, AHMADI B, VAHEDI S, 
BARZEGARI 
S, 
RAJABI 
A. 
MAJOR 
THALASSEMIA, 
SCREENING 
OR 
TREATMENT: 
AN 
ECONOMIC 
EVALUATION STUDY IN IRAN. INT J 
HEALTH POLICY MANAG. 2022 JUL 
1;11(7):1112-1119. 
DOI: 
10.34172/IJHPM.2021.04. 
• 
ATMAKUSUMA 
TD, 
SARAGIH 
EYP, 
RAJABTO W. ACHIEVEMENT OF PRE- 
AND 
POST-TRANSFUSION 
HEMOGLOBIN 
LEVELS 
IN 
ADULT 
TRANSFUSION-DEPENDENT 
BETA 
THALASSEMIA: ASSOCIATED FACTORS 
AND RELATIONSHIP TO REDUCTION OF 
SPLEEN ENLARGEMENT. INT J GEN 
MED. 2021 NOV 1;14:7515-7521. DOI: 
10.2147/IJGM.S338114. 
• 
GEITONA M, KARAGIANNI V, KATTAMIS 
A, VOSKARIDOU E, DROSOU M, VINI D, 
KALOGEROPOULOU M. THE ECONOMIC 
BURDEN OF TREATING THALASSEMIA 
IN GREECE. VALUE 
HEALTH. 
2014 
NOV;17(7):A526. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.JVAL.2014.08.1661. 
• 
KOREN A, PROFETA L, ZALMAN L, 
PALMOR H, LEVIN C, ZAMIR RB, SHALEV 
S, BLONDHEIM O. PREVENTION OF Β 
THALASSEMIA IN NORTHERN ISRAEL - A 
COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS. MEDITERR J 
HEMATOL 
INFECT 
DIS. 
2014 
FEB 
17;6(1):E2014012. 
DOI: 
10.4084/MJHID.2014.012. 
• 
ANTMEN A, ANGELUCCI E, LOSI S, 
BURROWS N, BARTIROMO C, HUXH. 
DIRECT 
MEDICAL 
CARE 
COST 
ASSOCIATED WITH Β-THALASSEMIA 
CARE IN TURKEY. BLOOD 2017.130( S1): 
2094.  
DOI.ORG/10.1182/BLOOD.V130.SUPPL_1
.2094.2094 
• 
RIEWPAIBOON A, NUCHPRAYOON I, 
TORCHARUS 
K, 
INDARATNA 
K, 
THAVORNCHAROENSAP M, UBOL BO. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA/HB 
E 
AND 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
THAI 
CHILDREN. BMC RES NOTES. 2010 JAN 
30;3:29. DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-29. 
• 
ANGELUCCI E, ANTMEN A, LOSI S, 
BURROWS N, BARTIROMO C, HU H. 
DIRECT 
MEDICAL 
CARE 
COSTS 
ASSOCIATED WITH Β-THALASSEMIA 
CARE IN ITALY. 901. HEALTH SERVICES 
RESEARCH—NON-MALIGNANT 
CONDITIONS: POSTER II. BLOOD (2017) 
130 
(SUPPL_1) 
: 
3368. 
HTTP://DOI.ORG/10.1182/BLOOD.V130.S
UPPL_1.3368.3368 
• 
ALABBADI I, MASSAD E, TAANI N, 
DABABNEH S, SHERSHEER Q, NIMRI O, 
MAHMOUD R, HIJAZEEN R, ISHAQ A. 
EXPLORING THE ECONOMIC ASPECTS 
OF Β-THALASSEMIA IN JORDAN IN 2019. 
JORDAN 
JOURNAL 
OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES, VOLUME 
15, NO. 3, 2022 
 
SELECTED ABSTRACTS 
 
General Cost of Thalassaemia 
Therapy 
 
Am J Hematol 2019 May;94(5):E129-E132. 
doi: 10.1002/ajh.25429. Epub 2019 Feb 23. 
Clinical and economic burden of regularly 
transfused adult patients with β-thalassemia in 
the United States: A retrospective cohort study 
using payer claims 
Mia Weiss1 2, Monika Parisi Jun2, Sujit Sheth 3 
This retrospective matched-cohort study was 
performed using payer claims to analyze the 
clinical and economic burden of current disease 
management for regularly transfused patients with 
β-thalassemia in the United States over a 1-year 
period. Briefly, regularly transfused patients with 
β-thalassemia and matched non-thalassemia 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
311 
controls were identified in the Truven Health 
MarketScan Research Databases between January 
1, 2011 and September 30, 2015. A total of 50 
regularly transfused patients were identified and 
matched to 250 controls. Average total healthcare 
costs per patient per year (PPPY) for regularly 
transfused patients were USD 128,062 versus USD 
5438 for matched controls (P < 0.0001). Both 
treatment-related and medication costs were also 
significantly higher for patients with β-thalassemia 
versus matched controls (P < 0.0001). The major 
components of these costs for regularly transfused 
patients were iron chelation therapy (USD 61,974) 
and red blood cell (RBC) transfusion costs (USD 
39,723). MRI and bone mineral density screenings 
cost an average of USD 2382 PPPY. The majority of 
costs in the “Other” category were laboratory tests 
(USD 16,209) and other medications (USD 4538). 
Overall, 
our 
study 
shows 
that 
ongoing 
comprehensive treatment of regularly transfused 
patients with β-thalassemia poses a substantial 
clinical 
and 
economic 
burden. Transfusion-
dependent patients with β-thalassemia had 
significantly 
higher 
healthcare 
costs 
and 
significantly higher utilization of healthcare 
resources 
versus 
matched 
controls. 
Both 
treatment-related and medication costs were also 
significantly 
higher 
for 
regularly 
transfused 
patients versus matched controls and were 
primarily driven by RBC transfusion and iron 
chelation therapy costs. 
 
Transfusion 2016 May;56(5):1038-45. 
doi: 10.1111/trf.13513. Epub 2016 Apr 4. 
Healthcare costs and outcomes of managing β-
thalassemia major over 50 years in the United 
Kingdom 
Diana Weidlich 1, Panos Kefalas 2, Julian F Guest 1 3 
Background: The objective was to estimate the 
incidence-based costs of treating β-thalassemia 
major (BTM) to the United Kingdom's National 
Health Service (NHS) over the first 50 years of a 
patient's life in terms of healthcare resource use 
and corresponding costs and the associated health 
outcomes. 
Study design and methods: This was a modeling 
study based on information obtained from a 
systematic review of published literature and 
clinicians involved in managing BTM in the United 
Kingdom. A state transition model was constructed 
depicting the management of BTM over a period of 
50 years. The model was used to estimate the 
incidence-based health economic impact that BTM 
imposes on the NHS and patients' health status in 
terms of the number of quality-adjusted life-years 
(QALYs) over 50 years. 
Results: The expected probability of survival at 50 
years is 0.63. Of patients who survive, 33% are 
expected to be without any complication and the 
other 67% are expected to experience at least one 
complication. Patients' health status over this 
period was estimated to be a mean of 11.5 
discounted QALYs per patient. Total healthcare 
expenditure attributable to managing BTM was 
estimated to be £483,454 ($720,201) at 2013/14 
prices over 50 years. The cost of managing BTM 
could be potentially reduced by up to 37% if one in 
two patients had a bone marrow transplant, with 
an ensuing improvement in health-related quality 
of life. 
Conclusion: This analysis provides the best 
estimate available of NHS resource use and costs 
with which to inform policy and budgetary 
decisions pertaining to this rare disease. 
 
Indian J Pediatr 2018 Feb;85(2):102-107. 
doi: 10.1007/s12098-017-2478-y. Epub 2017 Nov 9. 
Socio-demographic 
Profile 
and 
Economic 
Burden of Treatment of Transfusion Dependent 
Thalassemia (India) 
Amita Moirangthem1, Shubha R Phadke2 
Objective: To compile the socio-demographic 
profile and estimate the economic burden of 
transfusion dependent thalassemia. 
Methods: This cross-sectional descriptive study 
was conducted at a tertiary care hospital in north 
India. Transfusion dependent thalassemia patients 
on regular blood transfusion for at least a year were 
selected. Thalassemia diagnosis was based on 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
312 
HPLC and/or mutation analysis results. Clinical and 
laboratory parameters were collected from 
electronic health records. Information regarding 
socio-economic 
profile 
and 
costs 
incurred, 
including 
indirect 
costs 
were 
collected by 
interviewing patients' guardians. The data was 
analyzed as a whole cohort and also in subgroups 
based on age. 
Results: The data of 261 patients with a median 
age of 127 mo was collected. The median age at 
diagnosis was 9.8 mo. The total treatment 
expenses of a patient per year ranged from US$ 
629 (INR 41,514) to US$ 2300 (INR 151,800), in the 
different age groups, at an average of US$ 1135 
(INR 74,948). More than half (53%) of this was spent 
on medications. On an average, 38.8% of the family 
income was spent on the treatment of a 
thalassemia patient annually. Only 19 of 262 cases 
had an average pre-BT Hb ≥ 9 g/dl and serum 
ferritin ≤1500 ng/dl. 
Conclusions: The treatment for transfusion 
dependent thalassemia is costly and mostly borne 
by the families in India. This study provides a 
realistic magnitude of this burden and will be useful 
in planning a thalassemia management program at 
the state or national level. 
 
BMC Pediatr. 2020 May 27;20(1):257. 
doi: 10.1186/s12887-020-02160-3. 
A cost-of-illness analysis of β-Thalassaemia major 
in children in Sri Lanka - experience from a tertiary 
level teaching hospital 
Hamish Reed-Embleton1, Savinda Arambepola2, 
Simon Dixon1, Behrouz Nezafat Maldonado3, 
Anuja Premawardhena4 5, Mahinda Arambepola6, 
Jahangir A M Khan 3, Stephen Allen3  
Background: Sri Lanka has a high prevalence of β-
thalassaemia major. Clinical management is 
complex and long-term and includes regular blood 
transfusion and iron chelation therapy. The 
economic burden of β-thalassaemia for the Sri 
Lankan healthcare system and households is 
currently unknown. 
Methods: A prevalence-based, cost-of-illness 
study was conducted on the Thalassaemia Unit, 
Department of Paediatrics, Kandy Teaching 
Hospital, Sri Lanka. Data were collected from 
clinical records, consultations with the head of the 
blood bank and a consultant paediatrician directly 
involved with the care of patients, alongside 
structured interviews with families to gather data 
on the personal costs incurred such as those for 
travel. 
Results: Thirty-four children aged 2-17 years with 
transfusion dependent thalassaemia major and 
their parent/guardian were included in the study. 
The total average cost per patient year to the 
hospital was $US 2601 of which $US 2092 were 
direct costs and $US 509 were overhead costs. 
Mean household expenditure was $US 206 per year 
with food and transport per transfusion ($US 7.57 
and $US 4.26 respectively) being the highest cost 
items. 
Nine 
(26.5%) 
families 
experienced 
catastrophic levels of healthcare expenditure (> 
10% of income) in the care of their affected child. 
The poorest households were the most likely to 
experience such levels of expenditure. 
Conclusions: β-thalassaemia major poses a 
significant economic burden on health services and 
the families of affected children in Sri Lanka. 
Greater support is needed for the high proportion 
of families that suffer catastrophic out-of-pocket 
costs. 
 
J Res Health Sci Summer 2016;16(3):111-115. 
Economic Burden of Thalassemia Major in Iran, 
2015 
Firooz Esmaeilzadeh1, Azita Azarkeivan2, Sara 
Emamgholipour3, Ali Akbari Sari3, Mehdi Yaseri4, 
Batoul Ahmadi3, Mohtasham Ghaffari 5 
Background: Major Thalassemia is an autosomal 
recessive disease with complications, mortality 
and serious pathology. Today, the life expectancy 
of patients with major thalassemia has increased 
along with therapeutic advances. Therefore, they 
need lifelong care, and caring for them would incur 
many costs. Being aware of the patients' costs can 
be effective for controlling and managing the costs 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
313 
and providing efficient treatments for the care of 
patients. Hence, this study was conducted to 
estimate the economic burden of the patients with 
major thalassemia. 
Methods: Totally, 198 patients with major 
thalassemia were randomly selected from among 
the patients with major thalassemia in Tehran, Iran 
in 2015. The economic burden of the patients was 
estimated from a social perspective and through a 
bottom-up, prevalence-based approach. 
Results: The average annual cost per patient was 
estimated $ 8321.8 regardless of the cost of lost 
welfare. Of this amount, $ 7286.8 was related to 
direct medical costs, $ 461.4 to direct non-medical 
costs, and $ 573.5 to indirect costs. In addition, the 
annual cost per patient was estimated $ 1360.5 due 
to 
the 
distress 
caused 
by 
the 
disease 
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the high costs of the 
treatment of patients with major thalassemia, 
adopting new policies to reduce the costs that 
patients have to pay seems necessary. In addition, 
making new decisions regarding thalassemia 
screening, even with higher costs than the usual 
screening costs, can be useful since the costs of 
treatment are high. 
 
Health Policy 2015 Feb;119(2):239-43. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2014.12.011. Epub 2014 Dec 
19. 
The effects of economic sanctions on disease 
specific clinical outcomes of patients with 
thalassemia and hemophilia in Iran 
Mehran Karimi 1, Sezaneh Haghpanah 2 
Background: The sanctions applied by both the 
USA and the EU against Iran do not formally ban 
the exports of medicines; in practice, however, 
patients are experiencing great difficulty in 
securing the treatment. This article documents the 
impact of international sanctions on patients with 
thalassemia and hemophilia in southern Iran. 
Methods: This survey examined the specific effects 
of external sanctions on the access of patients to 
their treatment between 2009 and 2012 from the 
point of view of patients with thalassemia (n=69) 
and congenital coagulation disorders (n=40) as well 
as 
related 
physicians (n=20). Also, clinical 
manifestation and laboratory data of patients were 
compared in the same period. 
Results: Access to deferoxamine and Exjade as iron 
chelators 
in 
patients 
with 
thalasseamia, 
respectively, declined by almost 70% and half over 
this period. In addition, access to lyophilized 
coagulation factor VIII concentrate in hemophilia A 
dramatically dropped from 96.7% in 2009 to 3.3% 
in 2012. The clinical results showed a significant 
deterioration 
of 
arthropathy 
(P<0.001) 
in 
hemophiliac patients and a significant increase in 
serum ferritin levels in thalassemia patients 
(P=0.036). 
Conclusion: Sanctions had significant effect on 
public health on patients with thalassemia and 
hemophilia. 
 
BMC Health Services Research (2022) 22:304.  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-07663-6 
Healthcare resource utilization and direct costs 
of transfusion‑dependent thalassemia patients 
in Dubai, United Arab Emirates: retrospective 
cost‑of‑illness study. Shaikha Alshamsi1, Samer 
Hamidi and Hacer Ozgen Narci 
For this study, a retrospective prevalence-based 
cost-of-illness 
analysis 
based 
on 
the UAE 
healthcare system and patient perspectives was 
conducted among patients with TDT treated at the 
Dubai Thalassemia Center in 2019. Information 
regarding healthcare resource utilization and direct 
medical costs was collected from the billing system 
connected to the electronic medical record system. 
Patients and their families were interviewed for 
direct non-medical cost estimations.  
A total of 255 patients with TDT were included in 
the study. The mean annual direct medical cost was 
estimated at $35,713 with the main driver of the 
medical cost for the participants being iron 
chelation therapy (59.8%), followed by blood 
transfusions, (26.1% of the total direct medical 
costs). The mean annual direct non-medical costs 
was ($605). In conclusion TDT poses a substantial 
economic burden on the healthcare system, 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
314 
patients, and their families. Greater support is 
essential for families that suffer catastrophic out-
of-pocket expenses. 
In another study, the same authors found that TDT 
was associated with substantial productivity loss 
and indirect costs in the UAE. This amounted to 
4691USD, out of which absenteeism contributed 
$2812 and presenteeism contributed USD 1879, 
whereas the annual total productivity loss cost at 
unpaid work was $1104. The annual mean total 
indirect cost for paid and unpaid work was $5795. 
[Alshamsi S, Hamidi S, Ozgen Narci H. Productivity 
Loss and Associated Costs Among Patients with 
Transfusion-Dependent Thalassemia in Dubai, 
United Arab Emirates. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res. 
2021 
Sep 
29;13:853-862.doi: 
10.2147/CEOR.S334724. PMID: 34616164] 
 
Cost of specific therapeutic 
modalities 
Blood transfusions 
 
Transfusion 2019 Nov;59(11):3386-3395. 
doi: 10.1111/trf.15558. Epub 2019 Oct 30. 
The cost of blood: a study of the total cost of red 
blood cell transfusion in patients with β-
thalassemia using time-driven activity-based 
costing 
Zoe K McQuilten1 2 3, Alisa M Higgins1 2, Kelly 
Burns1, Sanjeev Chunilal 3, Terri Dunstan 4, Helen E 
Haysom1, Zane Kaplan3 4, Kylie Rushford 3, Karinna 
Saxby5, Renas Tahiri1, Neil Waters1, Erica M Wood 1 
3 
Background: To accurately quantify the costs of 
care for patients with transfusion-dependent 
thalassemia 
(TDT), 
and 
to 
evaluate 
cost-
effectiveness of new treatments, data are required 
on costs of regular red blood cell (RBC) 
transfusions. However, no previous studies have 
evaluated the costs of RBC transfusion specifically 
in chronically transfused patients. 
Methods and materials: We performed a time-
driven activity-based costing (TDABC) study using 
a health care provider perspective. This was 
performed over a 1-month period, capturing every 
step of the transfusion pathway for patients with 
TDT at a designated provider of specialist 
thalassemia services in Australia. Detailed process 
maps were developed to outline treatments and 
processes directly related to transfusion. For each 
process map, detailed data collection, including 
timing of activities, was performed multiple times 
to account for variation in practice. Costs 
associated with RBC transfusion were broken down 
into fixed, process, and RBC procurement costs. 
Results: The total per-unit cost was US$695.59 
(95% confidence interval, US$694.45-US$696.73). 
Approximately 40% of cost was for procurement of 
the RBC unit, with process costs accounting for 
55%. The single largest contributor to process costs 
was attributed to iron chelation medication 
(approximately 80%). In sensitivity analyses, 
seniority of staff, time to perform processes, and 
probabilities of different processes occurring did 
not substantially influence the RBC transfusion 
cost; however the number of RBC units per 
transfusion episode did impact the overall cost per 
RBC unit. 
Conclusions: We found significant costs associated 
with RBC transfusion for TDT, with the product cost 
contributing less than one-half of the total cost. 
 
Transfus Med 2019 Feb;29(1):33-40. 
doi: 10.1111/tme.12523. Epub 2018 Apr 10. 
A 
time-driven, 
activity-based 
costing 
methodology for determining the costs of red 
blood cell transfusion in patients with beta 
thalassaemia major 
K E Burns 1, H E Haysom 1, A M Higgins 2, N Waters 
1, R Tahiri 1, K Rushford 3, T Dunstan 3, K Saxby 4, Z 
Kaplan 3, S Chunilal 3, Z K McQuilten 1 2 3, E M Wood 
1 3 
Objectives: To describe the methodology to 
estimate the total cost of administration of a single 
unit of red blood cells (RBC) in adults with beta 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
315 
thalassaemia major in an Australian specialist 
haemoglobinopathy centre. 
Background: Beta thalassaemia major is a genetic 
disorder of haemoglobin associated with multiple 
end-organ complications and typically requiring 
lifelong RBC transfusion therapy. New therapeutic 
agents are becoming available based on advances 
in understanding of the disorder and its 
consequences. Assessment of the true total cost of 
transfusion, incorporating both product and 
activity costs, is required in order to evaluate the 
benefits and costs of these new therapies. 
Methods: We describe the bottom-up, time-
driven, activity-based costing methodology used 
to develop process maps to provide a step-by-step 
outline of the entire transfusion pathway. Detailed 
flowcharts for each process are described. Direct 
observations and timing of the process maps 
document all activities, resources, staff, equipment 
and consumables in detail. The analysis will include 
costs associated with performing these processes, 
including resources and consumables. Sensitivity 
analyses will be performed to determine the 
impact of different staffing levels, timings and 
probabilities associated with performing different 
tasks. 
Results: Thirty-one process maps have been 
developed, with over 600 individual activities 
requiring multiple timings. These will be used for 
future detailed cost analyses. 
Conclusions: Detailed process maps using bottom-
up, 
time-driven, 
activity-based 
costing 
for 
determining the cost of RBC transfusion in 
thalassaemia major have been developed. These 
could be adapted for wider use to understand and 
compare the costs and complexities of transfusion 
in other settings. 
 
Hematology 2018 Aug;23(7):417-422. 
doi: 10.1080/10245332.2017.1404262. Epub 2017 
Nov 21. 
Blood transfusion versus hydroxyurea in beta-
thalassemia in Iran: a cost-effectiveness study 
Ramin Ravangard 1 2, Zahra Mirzaei 1 3, Khosro 
Keshavarz 2, Sezaneh Haghpanah 4, Mehran Karimi 
4 
Introduction: Thalassemia intermedia is a type of 
anemia which has several treatments modalities. 
We aimed to study the cost effectiveness of two 
treatments, including blood transfusion and 
hydroxyurea, in patients with beta-thalassemia 
intermedia in south of Iran referred to a referral 
center affiliated to Iran, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences in 2015. 
Materials and methods: This was a cost-
effectiveness study which was conducted on 122 
patients with beta-thalassemia intermedia. The 
indicator of effectiveness in this study was the 
reduction of growth disorder (normal BMI). Data 
analysis was done using SPSS 21, Excel 2010 and 
Treeage 2011. Finally, the one-way sensitivity 
analysis was 
performed 
to 
determine the 
robustness of the results. 
Results: The average annual costs of blood 
transfusion and the use of hydroxyurea in 2015 
were 20733.27 purchasing power parity (PPP)$ and 
7040.29 PPP$, respectively. The effectiveness of 
blood transfusion was57.4% while in hydroxyurea 
group was 60.7%. 
Conclusion: The results showed that the cost 
effectiveness of using hydroxyurea was more than 
that of blood transfusion. Therefore, it is 
recommended that the use of hydroxyurea in the 
treatment of patients with beta-thalassemia 
intermedia would become the first priority, and 
more basic and supplementary insurance coverage 
for treating such patients using hydroxyurea 
should be considered. 
 
Iron chelation 
Medicine (Baltimore) 2020 Jul 10;99(28):e20949. 
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000020949. 
Cost-utility 
of 
new 
film-coated 
tablet 
formulation of deferasirox vs deferoxamine 
among major beta-thalassemia patients in Iran 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
316 
Parisa Saiyarsarai 1 2, Elahe Khorasani 1, Hasti 
Photogeraphy 1, Mohsen Ghaffari Darab 3, Meysam 
Seyedifar 4 
Objectives: Thalassemia is a hereditary disease, 
which caused economic burden in developing 
countries. This study evaluated the cost utility of 
new formulation of deferasirox (Jadenu) vs 
deferoxamine (Desferal) among B-Thalassemia-
major patients from payer perspective in Iran. 
Methods: 
An 
economic-evaluation 
through 
Markov model was performed. A systematic review 
was conducted in order to evaluate the clinical 
effectiveness of comparators. Because of chelating 
therapy is weight-dependent, patients were 
assumed to be 2 years-old at initiation in first and 
18 years-old in second scenario, and model was 
estimated lifetime costs and utilities. Costs were 
calculated to the Iran healthcare system through 
payer perspective and measured effectiveness 
using quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). One-way 
sensitivity analysis and budget impact analysis was 
also employed. 
Results: The 381 studies were retrieved from 
systematic searching through databases. After 
eliminating duplicate and irrelevant studies, 2 
studies selected for evaluating the effectiveness. 
Jadenu was associated with an incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio (ICER) of 1470.6 and 2544.7 US$ 
vs 
Desferal 
in 
first 
and 
second 
scenario 
respectively. The estimated ICER for Jadenu 
compared to generic deferoxamine was 2837.0 and 
6924.1 US$ for first and second scenario 
respectively. For all scenarios Jadenu is presumed 
as cost-effective option based on calculated ICER 
which was lower than 1 gross domestic product per 
capita in Iran. Sensitivity analysis showed that 
different parameters except discount rate and 
indirect cost did not have impact on results. Based 
on budget impact analysis the estimated cost for 
patients using Desferal (based on the market share 
of brand) was 44,021,478 US$ in 3 years vs 
42,452,606 US$ in replacing 33% of brand market 
share with Jadenu. This replacement corresponded 
to the cost saving of almost 1,568,872 US$ for the 
payers in 3 years. The calculated cost of using 
generic 
deferoxamine 
in 
all 
patients 
was 
68,948,392 US$. The increase in the cost of using 
Jadenu for 10% of all patients in this scenario would 
be 934,427 US$ (1.36%) US$ at the first year. 
Conclusions: Based on this analysis, film-coated 
deferasirox 
appeared 
to 
be 
cost-effective 
treatment in comparison with Desferal for 
managing child and adult chronic iron overload in 
B-thalassemia major patients of Iran. 
 
Mediterr J 
Hematol 
Infect 
Dis 
2020 
May 
1;12(1):e2020029. 
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2020.029. eCollection 2020. 
Cost-Utility Analysis of four Chelation Regimens 
for β-thalassemia Major: a Chinese Perspective 
Jialian Li 1, Peng Wang 1, Xue Li 1, Qiaoyu Wang 1, 
Jiayou Zhang 2, Yong Lin 1 
Objective: The Iron chelation is essential to 
prevent iron overload damage of vital organs, like 
heart, liver, and endocrine glands, in patients with 
transfusion-dependent thalassemia. The most 
common chelation regimens for β-thalassemia 
major (β-TM) patients used in China are a 
combination 
therapy 
of 
deferoxamine 
and 
deferiprone (DFO+DFP), deferoxamine (DFO) 
monotherapy, deferiprone (DFP) monotherapy 
and deferasirox (DFX) monotherapy. Such patients 
use iron chelators their whole lives, resulting in 
enormous treatment costs. This study analyses the 
cost-utility of these four regimens from the 
Chinese healthcare system perspective. 
Methods: A Markov decision model was used over 
a 5-year time horizon and was populated using 
clinical data from a systematic literature review. 
We obtained utility data from local and previous 
research. Costs were estimated using Chinese 
national sources. 
Results: From the base-case analysis results, DFP 
was the most cost-effective chelation regimen, 
followed by DFO, DFX, and DFO+DFP. DFP had 
97.32%, 99.43%, and 58.04% likelihood of being 
cost-effective versus DFX, DFO+DFP, and DFO, 
respectively, at a payment threshold of 193,932.00 
CNY/QALY (QALY, quality-adjusted life-year). 
Conclusions: DFP was the most cost-effective 
chelation regimen for β-TM patients, followed by 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
317 
DFO, DFX, and DFO+DFP. Using DFP as the 
primary treatment regimen may potentially result 
in cost-savings and QALY gains for the Chinese 
healthcare system. To increase these benefits, the 
Chinese government should take measures to 
lower DFX and DFO drug costs, and Chinese 
clinicians should choose the cheaper DFX and DFO, 
increase the utility of DFO+DFP and reduce 
mortality and morbidity of DFP. Changes in 
influential parameters easily affect the results of 
DFX versus DFO+DFP and of DFP versus DFO; 
clinicians should focus on such parameters and 
adjust the regimens accordingly. 
Keywords: Cost-Utility 
analysis; 
Deferasirox; 
Deferiprone; Deferoxamine; β-thalassemia major. 
 
Clin Drug Investig 2017 May;37(5):453-464. 
doi: 10.1007/s40261-017-0496-1. 
Cost-Utility Analysis of Three Iron Chelators 
Used in Monotherapy for the Treatment of 
Chronic Iron Overload in β-Thalassaemia Major 
Patients: An Italian Perspective 
Alessia Pepe 1, Giuseppe Rossi 2, Anthony Bentley 3, 
Maria Caterina Putti 
4, Ludovica Frizziero 
4, 
Domenico Giuseppe D'Ascola 5, Liana Cuccia 6, 
Anna Spasiano 7, Aldo Filosa 7, Vincenzo Caruso 8, 
Aishah Hanif 3, Antonella Meloni 9 
Purpose: Deferiprone (DFP), deferasirox (DFX) and 
deferoxamine (DFO) are used in thalassaemia 
major (TM) patients to treat chronic iron overload. 
We evaluated the cost-effectiveness of DFP, 
compared with DFX and DFO monotherapy, from 
an Italian healthcare system perspective. 
Methods: A Markov model was used over a time 
horizon of 5 years. Italian-specific cost data were 
combined with Italian efficacy data. Costs and 
quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) were calculated 
for each treatment, with cost-effectiveness 
expressed as cost per QALY. 
Results: In all scenarios modelled, DFP was the 
dominant treatment strategy. Sensitivity analyses 
showed that DFP dominated the other treatments 
with a >99% likelihood of being cost-effective 
against DFX and DFO at a willingness to pay 
threshold of €20,000 per QALY. 
Conclusions: DFP was the dominant and most 
cost-effective treatment for managing chronic iron 
overload in TM patients. Its use can result in 
substantial cost savings for the Italian healthcare 
system. 
 
J Med Econ 2016;19(3):292-303. 
doi: 10.3111/13696998.2015.1117979. Epub 2015 Nov 
30. 
Adherence to iron chelation therapy and 
associated healthcare resource utilization and 
costs in Medicaid patients with sickle cell disease 
and thalassemia 
Francis Vekeman 1, Medha Sasane 2, Wendy Y 
Cheng 3, Agnihotram V Ramanakumar 1, Jonathan 
Fortier 1, Ying Qiu 2, Mei Sheng Duh 3, Carole Paley 2, 
Patricia Adams-Graves 4 
Background: Sub-optimal patient adherence to 
iron chelation therapy (ICT) may impact patient 
outcomes and increase cost of care. This study 
evaluated the economic burden of ICT non-
adherence in patients with sickle cell disease (SCD) 
or thalassemia. 
Methods: Patients with SCD or thalassemia were 
identified from six state Medicaid programs (1997-
2013). Adherence was estimated using the 
medication possession ratio (MPR) of ≥0.80. All-
cause and disease-specific resource utilization per-
patient-per-month (PPPM) was assessed and 
compared between adherent and non-adherent 
patients using adjusted incidence rate ratios (aIRR). 
All-cause and disease-specific healthcare costs 
were computed using mean cost PPPM. Regression 
models adjusting for baseline characteristics were 
used to compare adherent and non-adherent 
patients. 
Results: A total of 728 eligible patients treated with 
ICT in the SCD cohort, 461 (63%) adherent, and 218 
in the thalassemia cohort, 137 (63%) adherent, 
were included in this study. In SCD patients, the 
adjusted rate of all-cause outpatient visits PPPM 
was higher in adherent patients vs non-adherent 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
318 
patients (aIRR [95% CI]: 1.05 [1.01-1.08], p < 
0.0001). Conversely, adherent patients incurred 
fewer all-cause inpatients visits (0.87 [0.81-0.94], p 
< 0.001) and ER visits (0.86 [0.78-0.93], p < 0.001). 
Similar trends were observed in SCD-related 
resource utilization rates and in thalassemia 
patients. Total all-cause costs were similar between 
adherent and non-adherent patients, but inpatient 
costs (adjusted cost difference = -$1530 PPPM, p = 
0.0360) were lower in adherent patients. 
Conclusion: Patients adherent to ICT had less 
acute care need and lower inpatient costs than 
non-adherent patients, although they had more 
outpatient visits. Improved adherence may be 
linked to better disease monitoring and has the 
potential to avoid important downstream costs 
associated with acute care visits and reduce the 
financial burden on health programs and managed 
care plans treating SCD and thalassemia patients. 
 
Pharmacoeconomics 2013 Sep;31(9):807-22. 
doi: 10.1007/s40273-013-0076-z. 
Cost-utility analysis of deferiprone for the 
treatment of β-thalassaemia patients with 
chronic iron overload: a UK perspective 
Anthony Bentley 1, Samantha Gillard, Michael 
Spino, John Connelly, Fernando Tricta 
Background: Patients with β-thalassaemia major 
experience chronic iron overload due to regular 
blood transfusions. Chronic iron overload can be 
treated using iron-chelating therapies such as 
desferrioxamine (DFO), deferiprone (DFP) and 
deferasirox (DFX) monotherapy, or DFO-DFP 
combination therapy. 
Objectives: This study evaluated the relative cost 
effectiveness of these regimens over a 5-year 
timeframe from a UK National Health Service 
(NHS) perspective, including personal and social 
services. 
Methods: A Markov model was constructed to 
evaluate the cost effectiveness of the treatment 
regimens over 5 years. Based on published 
randomized controlled trial evidence, it was 
assumed that all four treatment regimens had a 
comparable effect on serum ferritin concentration 
(SFC) and liver iron concentration (LIC), and that 
DFP was more effective for reducing cardiac 
morbidity and mortality. Published utility scores for 
route 
of 
administration 
were 
used, 
with 
subcutaneously administered DFO assumed to 
incur a greater quality of life (QoL) burden than the 
oral chelators DFP and DFX. Healthcare resource 
use, drug costs (2010/2011 costs), and utilities 
associated 
with adverse 
events were also 
considered, with the effect of varying all 
parameters assessed 
in sensitivity 
analysis. 
Incremental costs and quality-adjusted life-years 
(QALYs) were calculated for each treatment, with 
cost effectiveness expressed as incremental cost 
per QALY. Assumptions that DFP conferred no 
cardiac morbidity, mortality, or morbidity and 
mortality benefit were also explored in scenario 
analysis. 
Results: DFP was the dominant strategy in all 
scenarios modelled, providing greater QALY gains 
at a lower cost. Sensitivity analysis showed that 
DFP dominated all other treatments unless the 
QoL burden associated with the route of 
administration was greater for DFP than for DFO, 
which is unlikely to be the case. DFP had >99 % 
likelihood of being cost effective against all 
comparators at a willingness-to-pay threshold of 
£20,000 per QALY. 
Conclusions: In this analysis, DFP appeared to be 
the most cost-effective treatment available for 
managing chronic iron overload in β-thalassaemia 
patients. Use of DFP in these patients could 
therefore result in substantial cost savings. 
 
Transfusion 2013 Aug;53(8):1722-9. 
doi: 10.1111/trf.12024. Epub 2012 Dec 12. 
Cost-utility analysis of oral deferasirox versus 
infusional 
deferoxamine 
in 
transfusion-
dependent β-thalassemia patients 
Ali Keshtkaran 1, Mehdi Javanbakht, Sedigheh 
Salavati, Atefeh Mashayekhi, Mehran Karimi, Bijan 
Nuri 
Background: Deferasirox (DFX) is a novel iron 
chelator that has been shown to have similar 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
319 
efficacy and safety compared with deferoxamine 
(DFO) in patients with β-thalassemia. The aim of 
this study was to determine the cost utility of DFX 
versus DFO in β-thalassemia major patients from 
Iran's society perspective. 
Study design and methods: A Markov model has 
been developed to determine lifetime cost and 
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) of patients. To 
estimate the annual cost of each method, a cross-
sectional study was conducted among two groups 
of patients who received DFO and DFX (n = 100 and 
n = 45, respectively). Also a time trade-off method 
was used to estimate the utility of two strategies. 
Finally a one-way and probabilistic sensitivity 
analysis was conducted to examine the strength of 
the results. 
Results: Our base-case analysis showed that 
estimated total lifetime costs per patient for DFX 
and DFO were 47,029 international dollar ($Int) and 
$Int143,522, respectively, while the estimated total 
discounted QALYs per person were 12.28 and 7.76, 
respectively. 
Calculated 
incremental 
cost-
effectiveness ratio showed that DSX is a dominant 
therapy and its estimated lifetime net monetary 
benefit was $Int273,528. 
Conclusion: We conclude that the use of DFX 
instead of DFO represents a cost-effective use of 
resources for treatment of iron overload in patients 
with β-thalassemia from Iran's society perspective. 
 
J Formos Med Assoc 2013 Apr;112(4):221-9. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2011.08.020. Epub 2012 Apr 30. 
A pharmaco-economic evaluation of deferasirox 
for treating patients with iron overload caused 
by transfusion-dependent thalassemia in Taiwan 
Wan-Ling Ho 1, Kuo-Piao Chung, Szu-Sheng Yang, 
Meng-Yao Lu, Shiann-Tarng Jou, Hsiu-Hao Chang, 
Yung-Li Yang, Dong-Tsamn Lin, Kai-Hsin Lin 
Background/purpose: The newly available iron 
chelator deferasirox (Exjade, Novartis) is expected 
to provide better long-term clinical outcomes and 
improved quality of life for patients with 
thalassemia than its predecessor, deferoxamine 
(Desferal, Novartis), because of its oral tablet form. 
Methods: We used the Markov model to estimate 
total additional lifetime costs and quality-adjusted 
life years (QALYs) gained with deferasirox versus 
deferoxamine 
in 
patients 
with 
transfusion-
dependent thalassemia. Patients were assumed to 
be 2 years of age at initiation of chelation therapy. 
Clinical outcomes in terms of morbidity and 
mortality from associated complications and life 
expectancy for the study population were 
estimated using the databases of the Bureau of 
National Health Insurance and the Health and Vital 
Statistics of Taiwan. Treatment costs were based 
on analyses of health insurance claims for patients 
with transfusion-dependent thalassemia. Utilities 
in terms of quality of life were also included in the 
model. The incremental cost-utility ratio of 
deferasirox versus deferoxamine was defined by 
the ratio of the difference in expected lifetime costs 
to the difference in QALYs. One-way sensitivity 
analyses 
were 
performed 
to 
examine 
the 
robustness of the results to key assumptions. 
Results: Patients treated with deferasirox are 
expected to experience a lower incidence of 
associated complications and obtain 2.3 QALYs 
(discounted) at an additional lifetime cost of 
US$36,291 per patient (US$15,596 per QALY). 
Sensitivity analyses showed that the unit drug cost 
of deferasirox had the greatest impact on the 
incremental cost-utility ratio. In addition, the 
incremental cost-utility ratio will increase by 
delaying the starting age (2 years of age in our 
study) of chelation therapy. 
Conclusion: 
Compared 
with 
infusional 
deferoxamine, oral deferasirox improved clinical 
outcomes and quality of life in terms of iron 
chelation in transfusion-dependent patients with 
thalassemia at a reasonable cost from a healthcare 
perspective. 
 
Clin Drug Investig 2012 Dec;32(12):805-15. 
doi: 10.1007/s40261-012-0008-2. 
Lifetime cost-utility analyses of deferasirox in 
beta-thalassaemia patients with chronic iron 
overload: a UK perspective 
Jonathan Karnon 1, Keith Tolley, Joao Vieira, David 
Chandiwana 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
320 
Background and objectives: Regular blood 
transfusions for beta-thalassaemia patients lead to 
the accumulation of iron deposits in the body. In 
order to remove such deposits, iron chelation 
therapy is required. Subcutaneously administered 
deferoxamine has been the gold standard 
chelation therapy for over 40 years. Deferasirox is 
a newer chelation therapy that is taken orally once 
daily. The objective of this study was to estimate 
the long-term costs and quality-adjusted life-years 
(QALYs) 
associated 
with 
deferoxamine 
and 
deferasirox in a cohort of transfusion-dependent 
beta-thalassaemia patients from a UK health 
service perspective. 
Methods: A 50-year annual cycle state transition 
model comprised three core health states: alive 
without cardiac complications, alive with cardiac 
complications, and dead, as well as representing 
other chronic complications of iron overload: 
diabetes, hypogonadism, hypoparathyroidism and 
hypothyroidism. The model was calibrated to 
identify sets of convergent input parameter values 
that predicted observed overall survival by mean 
lifetime compliance with chelation therapy. A 
pivotal non-inferiority trial informed the main 
estimates of the effectiveness of deferasirox, which 
were applied to the calibrated model. Using cost 
values for the year 2011, costs and utilities were 
summed over patients' lifetimes to estimate 
lifetime costs and QALY gains. 
Results: Mean lifetime treatment costs for patients 
receiving deferoxamine were £70,000 higher than 
deferasirox. Drug acquisition costs were £100,000 
higher for deferasirox, but administration costs 
associated with deferoxamine were £170,000 
higher. Higher compliance associated with oral 
deferasirox 
administration 
led 
to 
fewer 
complications. Combined with the quality-of-life 
effects of an oral mode of administration, an 
average gain of 4.85 QALYs for deferasirox was 
estimated. In the base case, deferasirox dominates 
deferoxamine, i.e., costs less and patients gain 
more QALYs. The key parameter is the proportion 
of deferoxamine patients using balloon infusers. 
Sensitivity analyses showed that even when the 
proportion of patients using balloon infusers is 
decreased from 79 to 25 %, the incremental cost 
per QALY gained remains well under £20,000. 
Conclusion: Higher drug acquisition costs for 
deferasirox are offset by the avoidance of infusion-
related equipment costs. Combined with health 
benefits 
derived 
from 
an 
oral 
mode 
of 
administration 
and 
improved 
compliance, 
deferasirox has a high probability of being a cost-
effective 
intervention 
compared 
with 
deferoxamine. 
 
Clin Drug Investig 2011;31(7):493-505. 
doi: 10.2165/11587120-000000000-00000. 
Iron-chelating 
therapies 
in 
a 
transfusion-
dependent thalassaemia population in Thailand: 
a cost-effectiveness study 
Nantasit Luangasanatip 1, Nathorn 
Chaiyakunapruk, Nilawan Upakdee, Peerapon 
Wong  
Background and objective: β-Thalassaemia is a 
major public health problem in Thailand. Use of 
appropriate iron-chelating agents could prevent 
thalassaemia-related complications, which are 
costly to the healthcare system. This study aimed 
to evaluate the cost effectiveness of deferoxamine 
(DFO), deferiprone (DFP) and deferasirox (DFX) in 
Thai 
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassaemia 
patients from the societal perspective. 
Methods: A Markov model was used to project the 
life-time costs and outcomes represented as 
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). Data on the 
clinical efficacy and safety of all therapeutic 
options were obtained from a systematic review 
and clinical trials. Transition probabilities were 
derived from published studies. Costs were 
obtained from the Thai Drug and Medical Supply 
Information Center, Thai national reimbursement 
rate information and other Thai literature sources. 
A discount rate of 3% was used. Incremental cost-
effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were presented as year 
2009 values. A base-case analysis was performed 
for thalassaemia patients requiring regular blood 
transfusion therapy, while a separate analysis was 
performed 
for 
patients 
requiring 
low 
(i.e. 
symptom-dependent, 
less 
frequent) 
blood 
transfusion therapy. A series of sensitivity analysis 
and cost-effectiveness acceptability curves were 
constructed. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
321 
Results: Compared with DFO, using DFP was 
dominant with lifetime cost savings of $US91 117. 
Comparing DFX with DFO, the incremental cost 
was $US522 863 and incremental QALY was 5.77 
with an ICER of $US90 648 per QALY. When 
compared with DFP, the ICER of DFX was $US106 
445 per QALY. A cost-effectiveness analysis curve 
showed the probability of DFX being cost effective 
was 0% when compared with either DFO or DFP, 
based on the cost-effectiveness cut-off value of 
$US2902 per QALY. When compared with DFP, DFX 
was cost effective only if the DFX cost was as low as 
$US1.68 per 250 mg tablet. The results of the 
analysis in patients requiring low blood transfusion 
therapy were not different from those of the base-
case analysis. 
Conclusions: Our findings suggest that using DFP 
is cost saving when compared with conventional 
therapy, while using DFX is not cost effective 
compared with either DFO or DFP in Thai patients 
with 
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassaemia. 
Policy-makers and clinicians may consider using 
such information in their decision-making process 
in Thailand. 
 
Pharmacoeconomics 2011 Jun;29(6):461-74. 
doi: 10.2165/11589250-000000000-00000. 
Pharmacoeconomic considerations in treating 
iron overload in patients with β-thalassaemia, 
sickle 
cell 
disease 
and 
myelodysplastic 
syndromes in the US: a literature review 
Bin Zhang 1, Prina Z Donga, Mitra Corral, Medha 
Sasane, Jeffrey D Miller, Chris L Pashos 
 
Patients with β-thalassaemia, sickle cell disease 
(SCD) and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) 
require chronic blood transfusions, which can lead 
to iron overload and substantial morbidity and 
mortality. To reduce the excess iron and its 
deleterious effects, available iron chelation therapy 
(ICT) in the US includes oral deferasirox or 
infusional deferoxamine (DFO). The aim of this 
study was to review and synthesize the available 
pharmacoeconomic evidence on ICT in patients 
with β-thalassaemia, SCD and MDS in the US. We 
systematically 
identified 
and 
reviewed 
pharmacoeconomic studies of ICT in patients with 
β-thalassaemia, SCD and MDS that either were 
published in MEDLINE-indexed, English-language 
journals from 1999 to 2009, or appeared in medical 
society websites and scientific meeting abstracts. 
We assessed available cost-of-illness, cost-of-
treatment, cost-consequence, cost-effectiveness, 
utility 
and 
patient-satisfaction 
studies. The 
majority of the 20 identified studies assessed cost 
of treatment, mainly focusing on acquisition and 
administration costs of ICTs. Gaps in the published 
literature include current data on direct medical 
costs for patients with MDS, direct medical costs 
associated with complications of iron overload, 
direct non-medical costs, indirect costs and patient 
utilities. Different underlying model assumptions, 
methodologies and comparators were found in the 
cost-effectiveness studies, which yielded a broad 
range of incremental cost-effectiveness ratios for 
different 
ICTs. Comprehensive 
cost-of-illness 
studies are needed to address data gaps in the 
published literature regarding the economic 
burden 
of 
iron 
overload. 
Comparative-
effectiveness 
studies 
that 
evaluate 
clinical, 
economic and patient-reported outcomes would 
help the medical community to better understand 
the value of different ICTs. 
 
Pharmacoeconomics 2007;25(4):329-42. 
doi: 10.2165/00019053-200725040-00005. 
Cost effectiveness of once-daily oral chelation 
therapy with deferasirox versus infusional 
deferoxamine 
in 
transfusion-dependent 
thalassaemia patients: US healthcare system 
perspective 
Thomas E Delea 1, Oleg Sofrygin, Simu K Thomas, 
Jean-Francois Baladi, Pradyumna D Phatak, 
Thomas D Coates 
Background: Deferasirox is a recently approved 
once-daily oral iron chelator that has been shown 
to reduce liver iron concentrations and serum 
ferritin levels to a similar extent as infusional 
deferoxamine. 
Objective: To determine the cost effectiveness of 
deferasirox versus deferoxamine in patients with 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
322 
beta-thalassaemia major from a US healthcare 
system perspective. 
Methods: A Markov model was used to estimate 
the total additional lifetime costs and QALYs 
gained with deferasirox versus deferoxamine in 
patients with beta-thalassaemia major and chronic 
iron overload from blood transfusions. Patients 
were assumed to be 3 years of age at initiation of 
chelation therapy and to receive prescribed 
dosages of deferasirox and deferoxamine that have 
been shown to be similarly effective in such 
patients. Compliance with chelation therapy and 
probabilities of iron overload-related cardiac 
disease and death by degree of compliance were 
estimated using data from published studies. Costs 
($US, 
year 
2006 
values) 
of 
deferoxamine 
administration and iron overload-related cardiac 
disease were based on analyses of health insurance 
claims of transfusion-dependent thalassaemia 
patients. Utilities were based on a study of patient 
preferences for oral versus infusional chelation 
therapy, 
as 
well 
as 
published 
literature. 
Probabilistic and deterministic sensitivity analyses 
were employed to examine the robustness of the 
results to key assumptions. 
Results: Deferasirox resulted in a gain of 4.5 QALYs 
per patient at an additional expected lifetime cost 
of $US126,018 per patient; the cost per QALY 
gained was $US28,255. The cost effectiveness of 
deferasirox versus deferoxamine was sensitive to 
the 
estimated 
costs 
of 
deferoxamine 
administration and the quality-of-life benefit 
associated with oral versus infusional therapy. Cost 
effectiveness was also relatively sensitive to the 
equivalent daily dose of deferasirox, and the unit 
costs of deferasirox and deferoxamine, and was 
more favourable in younger patients. 
Conclusion: Results of this analysis of the cost 
effectiveness of oral deferasirox versus infusional 
deferoxamine suggest that deferasirox is a cost 
effective iron chelator from a US healthcare 
perspective. 
 
Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 2014 
Oct;14(5):651-60. 
doi: 10.1586/14737167.2014.927314. Epub 2014 Jun 
11. 
Cost-utility of chelators in transfusion-dependent β-
thalassemia major patients: a review of the 
pharmacoeconomic literature 
Todd A Lee 1, Sarah von Riedemann, Fernando Tricta 
In the inherited hematologic disorder β-thalassemia 
major, patients receive regular, lifelong blood 
transfusions, which carry excess iron that the body 
is 
unable 
to 
eliminate. Chelation 
therapy 
(deferoxamine, 
deferiprone, 
deferasirox 
or 
deferoxamine-deferiprone 
combination) 
is 
required to reduce iron accumulation in target 
organs and the associated morbidity and mortality. 
Each 
chelation 
regimen 
has 
a 
distinct 
safety/efficacy 
profile 
and 
particular 
costs 
associated with its use. This review aims to provide 
an overview of published cost-utility analyses of 
currently used chelation regimens, and to 
comment on the potential relevance of their 
findings in the USA market, where deferiprone has 
recently been introduced. 
 
Mediterr 
J 
Hematol 
Infect 
Dis 
2019 
Jul 
1;11(1):e2019036. 
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2019.036. eCollection 2019. 
Economic Evaluation of Chelation Regimens for 
β-Thalassemia Major: a Systematic Review 
Jialian Li 1, Yong Lin 1, Xue Li 1, Jiayou Zhang 2 
Background: Deferoxamine (DFO) or Deferiprone 
(DFP) or Deferasirox (DFX) monotherapy and DFO 
and DFP combination therapy (DFO+DFP) were 
four commonly implemented now chelation 
regimens for the iron overloaded of β-thalassemia 
major. This systematic review aims to determine 
the cost-effectiveness of four chelation regimens 
and provide evidence for the rational use of 
chelation regimens for β-thalassemia major 
therapy in the clinic. 
Methods: A systematic literature search in 
MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, China 
Biology Medicine, China National Knowledge 
Infrastructure, VIP Data, and WanFang Data was 
conducted in April 2018. In addition, a manual 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
323 
search was performed. Two researchers, working 
independently, selected the papers, extracted the 
data, and assessed the methodological quality of 
the included documents. Each included paper was 
evaluated 
using 
a 
checklist 
developed 
by 
Drummond et al. 
Results: The number of records was initially 968, 
and eight papers met the final eligibility criteria. All 
the included eight papers were cost-utility 
analyses, and their methodological quality was fair. 
In these eight papers, nineteen studies were 
present. Nine studies of DFX versus DFO had 
contradictory results. Out of the nineteen studies, 
three studies of DFX versus DFP established that 
using DFP was cost-effective. Three studies of DFP 
versus DFO proved that using DFP was cost-
effective. One survey of DFO+DFP versus DFO 
found that using DFO was cost-effective. One 
study of DFO+DFP versus DFP found that using 
DFP was cost-effective. Moreover, there were two 
studies of DFO+DFP versus DFX, but we cannot be 
sure which one of two chelation regimens was cost-
effective. 
Conclusion: In brief, DFP is cost-effective, followed 
by DFO or DFX, when an iron chelator is to be used 
alone for β-thalassemia iron overload treatment. 
All studies that compared DFO+DFP with DFO (or 
DFP) monotherapy established that the DFO+DFP 
was not cost-effective. Existing studies about 
DFO+DFP versus DFX could not prove which one of 
two 
chelation 
regimens 
was 
cost-effective. 
However, due to the low number of DFO+DFP 
versus DFO (or DFP or DFX) monotherapy studies, 
more extensive, high-quality research is required 
for further analysis and confirmation of our 
findings. Moreover, the cost-effectiveness is not an 
absolute issue when in different countries (regions) 
the results are opposite for other countries 
(regions). As a result, the local/national context had 
a substantial influence on the results of the 
pharmacoeconomic evaluation. 
 
Curative therapies: HSCT and 
Gene therapy 
 
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2018 Oct;24(10):2119-
2126. 
doi: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.04.005. Epub 2018 Apr 16. 
Cost Effectiveness of Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Transplantation Compared with Transfusion 
Chelation for Treatment of Thalassemia Major 
M Joseph John 1, Gaurav Jyani 2, Aikaj Jindal 3, 
Ranjeet Singh Mashon 4, Amrith Mathew 5, Shruti 
Kakkar 6, Pankaj Bahuguna 2, Shankar Prinja 7 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is 
the only cure for thalassemia major (TM), which 
inflicts a significant 1-time cost. Hence, it is 
important to explore the cost effectiveness of 
HSCT versus lifelong regular transfusion-chelation 
(TC) therapy. This study was undertaken to 
estimate incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-
year (QALY) gained with the intervention group 
HSCT, and the comparator group TC, in TM 
patients. A combination of decision tree and 
Markov model was used for analysis. A hospital 
database, supplemented 
with a review of 
published literature, was used to derive input 
parameters for the model. A lifetime study horizon 
was used and future costs and consequences were 
discounted at 3%. Results are presented using 
societal perspective. Incremental cost per QALY 
gained with use of HSCT as compared with TC was 
64,096 (US$986) in case of matched related donor 
(MRD) and 1,67,657 (US$2579) in case of a matched 
unrelated donor transplantation. The probability of 
MRD transplant to be cost effective at the 
willingness to pay threshold of Indian per capita 
gross domestic product is 94%. HSCT is a long-
term value for money intervention that is highly 
cost effective and its long-term clinical and 
economic benefits outweigh those of TC. 
 
Hum Gene Ther 2019 Jun;30(6):753-761. 
doi: 10.1089/hum.2018.178. Epub 2019 May 3. 
Innovative 
Curative 
Treatment 
of 
Beta 
Thalassemia: Cost-Efficacy Analysis of Gene 
Therapy Versus Allogenic Hematopoietic Stem-
Cell Transplantation 
Séverine Coquerelle 1 2 3, Mariem Ghardallou 1, Setti 
Rais 4 5, Pierre Taupin 6, Fabien Touzot 6 7, Laure 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
324 
Boquet 5, Stéphane Blanche 6, Semir Benaouadi 6, 
Thomas Brice 6, Caroline Tuchmann-Durand 5, Jean 
Antoine Ribeil 6, Elisa Magrin 5, Etienne Lissillour 6, 
Lise Rochaix 4 8, Marina Cavazzana 5 9 10, Isabelle 
Durand-Zaleski 1 3 11 
Seventy-five percent of patients with beta 
thalassemia (β-thalassemia) do not have human 
leukocyte antigen-matched siblings and until 
recently had no access to a curative treatment. 
Gene therapy is a promising treatment that can be 
proposed to these patients. This study estimates its 
cost and efficacy. In a monocentric retrospective 
study and cost-efficacy analysis, this study 
compared the two-year outcomes and costs of 
patients with β-thalassemia treated by gene 
therapy 
and 
hematopoietic 
stem-cell 
transplantation (HSCT). Grade III and grade IV 
complications, hospitalizations, and length of stay 
were extracted from the hospital discharge data. 
Costs were estimated from hospital accounting 
information and national cost studies. A total of 
seven 
patients 
with 
β-thalassemia 
treated 
between 2009 and 2016 were included, of whom 
four received gene therapy. Patients treated by 
gene therapy were 
older and had fewer 
complications and hospital admissions. Infectious 
complications were three times more frequent for 
patients treated with HSCT than for gene therapy. 
Average costs were €608,086 for patients treated 
by gene therapy and €215,571 for HSCT. The total 
cost of the vector was 48% of the total cost of gene 
therapy. Gene therapy as a curative alternative for 
patients 
lacking 
human 
leukocyte 
antigen-
matched donors was costlier but resulted in fewer 
complications than HSCT. 
 
BMC Health Serv Res 2013 Feb 5;13:45. 
doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-13-45. 
Cost utility analysis of reduced intensity 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in 
adolescence and young adult with severe 
thalassemia compared to hypertransfusion and 
iron chelation program 
Rosarin Sruamsiri 1, Nathorn Chaiyakunapruk, 
Samart Pakakasama, Somtawin Sirireung, Nintita 
Sripaiboonkij, Udomsak Bunworasate, Suradej 
Hongeng 
Background: 
Hematopoieticic 
stem 
cell 
transplantation is the only therapeutic option that 
can cure thalassemia disease. Reduced intensity 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (RI-HSCT) 
has demonstrated a high cure rate with minimal 
complications compared to other options. Because 
RI-HSCT is very costly, economic justification for its 
value is needed. This study aimed to estimate the 
cost-utility of RI-HSCT compared with blood 
transfusions combined with iron chelating therapy 
(BT-ICT) for adolescent and young adult with 
severe thalassemia in Thailand. 
Methods: A Markov model was used to estimate 
the relevant costs and health outcomes over the 
patients' lifetimes using a societal perspective. All 
future costs and outcomes were discounted at a 
rate of 3% per annum. The efficacy of RI-HSCT was 
based a clinical trial including a total of 18 
thalassemia patients. Utility values were derived 
directly from all patients using EQ-5D and SF-6D. 
Primary outcomes of interest were lifetime costs, 
quality adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained, and the 
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) in US 
($) per QALY gained. One-way and probabilistic 
sensitivity analyses (PSA) were conducted to 
investigate the effect of parameter uncertainty. 
Results: In base case analysis, the RI-HSCT group 
had a better clinical outcomes and higher lifetime 
costs. The incremental cost per QALY gained was 
US $3,236 per QALY. The acceptability curve 
showed that the probability of RI-HSCT being cost-
effective was 71% at the willingness to pay of 1 time 
of Thai Gross domestic product per capita (GDP per 
capita), approximately US $4,210 per QALY gained. 
The most sensitive parameter was utility of severe 
thalassemia patients without cardiac complication 
patients. 
Conclusion: At a societal willingness to pay of 1 
GDP per capita, RI-HSCT was a cost-effective 
treatment for adolescent and young adult with 
severe thalassemia in Thailand compared to BT-
ICT. 
Journal of Market Access & Health policy 2021, VOL. 
9, 1922028 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
325 
https://doi.org/10.1080/20016689.2021.1922028 
Economic 
evaluation 
of 
betibeglogene 
autotemcel (Beti-cel) gene addition therapy in 
transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia 
Anuraag R. Kansala, Odette S. Reifsnidera, Sarah 
B. Branda, Neil Hawkinsb, Anna Coughlana, Shujun 
Lia, Lael Cragina, Clark Paramorec, Andrew C. 
Dietzc and J. Jaime Caro 
Background: 
Standard 
of 
care 
(SoC) 
for 
transfusion-dependent 
β-thalassemia 
(TDT) 
requires lifelong, regular blood transfusions as well 
as chelation to reduce iron accumulation. 
Objective: This study investigates the cost-
effectiveness of betibeglogene autotemcel (‘beti-
cel’; LentiGlobin for β-thalassemia) one-time, gene 
addition therapy compared to lifelong SoC for TDT. 
Study design: Microsimulation model simulated 
the lifetime course of TDT based on a causal 
sequence in which transfusion requirements 
determine tissue iron levels, which in turn 
determine risk of iron overload complications that 
increase mortality. Clinical trial data informed beti-
cel clinical parameters; effects of SoC on iron levels 
came from real-world studies; iron overload 
complication rates and mortality were based on 
published literature. The study was conducted in 
the USA from the commercial payer perspective. 
The participants were TDT patients aged 2–50 
years. 
Results: The model predicts beti-cel adds 3.8 
discounted life years (LYs) or 6.9 QALYs versus 
standard od care. Discounted lifetime costs were 
$2.28 M for beti-cel ($572,107 if excluding beti-cel 
cost) and $2.04 M for SoC, with a resulting ICER of 
$34,833 per QALY gained. 
Conclusion: Beti-cel is cost-effective for TDT 
patients compared to SoC. This is due to longer 
survival and cost offset of lifelong SoC. Beti-cel has 
the potential to transform patients’ lives and its 
benefits are shown to be cost-effective or cost-
saving in the one-time treatment of TDT. 
 
Cost effectiveness of screening 
and prevention 
Screening and Prenatal 
diagnosis 
 
Int J Prev Med 2012 Oct;3(10):687-92. 
Evaluation and cost analysis of national health 
policy of thalassaemia screening in west-
azerbaijan province of Iran 
Elham Ahmadnezhad 1, Nariman Sepehrvand, 
Farshid Fayyaz Jahani, Sanaz Hatami, Catauon 
Kargar, Majid Mirmohammadkhani, Shahrzad 
Bazargan-Hejazi 
Background: Thalassaemia is one of the most 
common Mendelian disorders in Mediterranean 
area. Iran has about 26,000 Thalassaemic patients, 
so it is one of the most affected countries. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate the screening 
program and cost analysis of Thalassaemia 
prevention program in West-Azerbaijan province of 
Iran. 
Methods: This study evaluated the efficacy of 
Health system's Thalassaemia prevention program 
with a sensitivity analysis for its costs. The second 
five years of the program was evaluated. The 
economic burden of Thalassaemia is determined 
by the birth prevalence of the affected infants and 
the cost that is accrued to treat the infected 
individuals and was compared with the total cost of 
screening the couples for thalassemia trait. 
Results: The average incidence rate of major 
Thalassaemia was 19.8 per 100,000 live births and 
mean coverage rate of program was 74%. The rate 
of canceling the marriage among carrier couples 
was 53%. Cost analysis showed that the cost of 
screening and prenatal diagnosis program was 
much lower than the cost of treatment in potential 
thalassaemic patients. 
Conclusions: 
The 
prevention 
program 
of 
Thalassaemia including a premarital and pre-natal 
screening 
in 
west 
Azerbaijan 
province 
is 
demonstrated to be cost-effective. Taking some 
actions in order to increase the coverage of pre-
marital screening, providing pre-natal diagnosis in 
private and public sector, complete insurance 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
326 
coverage for the high-risk couples to perform the 
investigations more easily, were recommended. 
 
Br J Gen Pract 2011 Oct;61(591):e620-7. 
doi: 10.3399/bjgp11X601325. 
 
Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia in 
primary care: a cost-effectiveness study 
Stirling Bryan 
1, Elizabeth Dormandy, Tracy 
Roberts, Anthony Ades, Pelham Barton, Ariadna 
Juarez-Garcia, Lazaros Andronis, Jonathan Karnon, 
Theresa M Marteau 
Background: 
Haemoglobinopathies, 
including 
sickle cell disease and thalassaemia (SCT), are 
inherited disorders of haemoglobin. Antenatal 
screening for SCT rarely occurs before 10 weeks of 
pregnancy. 
Aim: To explore the cost-effectiveness of offering 
SCT screening in a primary care setting, during the 
pregnancy confirmation visit. 
Design and setting: A model-based cost-
effectiveness analysis of inner-city areas with a 
high proportion of residents from ethnic minority 
groups. 
Method: Comparison was made of three SCT 
screening approaches: 'primary care parallel' 
(primary care screening with test offered to mother 
and father together); 'primary care sequential 
(primary care screening with test offered to the 
mother and then the father only if the mother is a 
carrier); and 'midwife care' (sequential screening at 
the first midwife consultation). The model was 
populated with data from the SHIFT (Screening for 
Haemoglobinopathies In First Trimester) trial and 
other sources. 
Results: Compared to midwife care, primary care 
sequential had a higher NHS cost of £34,000 per 
10,000 pregnancies (95% confidence interval [CI] = 
£15,000 to £51,000) and an increase of 2623 women 
screened (95% CI: 1359 to 4495), giving a cost per 
additional woman screened by 10 weeks of £13. 
Primary care parallel was dominated by primary 
care sequential, with both higher costs and fewer 
women screened. 
Conclusion: The policy judgement is whether an 
earlier opportunity for informed reproductive 
choice has a value of at least £13. Further work is 
required to understand the value attached to 
earlier informed reproductive choices. 
 
Prenat Diagn 2004 Nov;24(11):899-907. 
doi: 10.1002/pd.1035. 
Cost-effectiveness of prenatal screening for 
thalassaemia in Hong Kong 
K Y Leung 1, C P Lee, M H Y Tang, E T Lau, L K L Ng, 
Y P Lee, H Y Chan, E S K Ma, Vivian Chan 
Objectives: To determine the cost effectiveness of 
a universal prenatal screening program for alpha- 
and beta-thalassaemia. 
Methods: We 
retrospectively 
reviewed 
our 
program from 1998 to 2002, and calculated the 
direct and indirect costs of various components. 
Results: 18,936 women were screened at our 
prenatal clinic and 153 couples were subsequently 
referred to our Prenatal Diagnostic Centre for 
counselling and further investigations. In addition, 
there were 238 tertiary referrals and 157 self-
referrals. After investigations, 84 fetuses were at 
risk 
of 
beta-thalassaemia 
major/beta-E 
thalassaemia, 19 of them were affected and 18 
were aborted. The total expenditure on our 
program (HK 10.0 million dollars) would be less 
than the postnatal service costs (HK 40.4 million 
dollars) for 18 beta-thalassaemia major fetuses if 
they were born. Of 361 women at risk of carrying a 
homozygous 
alpha0-thalassaemia 
fetus, 
311 
(86.2%) opted for the indirect approach (using 
serial ultrasound examinations to exclude Hb Bart's 
disease), and 76 (24.5%) subsequently underwent 
an invasive test for a definitive diagnosis. The 
sensitivity and false positive rate of this indirect 
approach was 100.0% and 2.9% respectively. 
Conclusion: It is cost effective to run a universal 
prenatal screening program in an area where both 
beta-thalassaemia and alpha-thalassaemia are 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
327 
prevalent. The indirect approach can effectively 
avoid an invasive test in unaffected pregnancies. 
 
Hemoglobin 2016 Aug;40(4):247-9. 
doi: 10.1080/03630269.2016.1197840. Epub 2016 Jul 
7. 
 
A Program on Noninvasive Prenatal Diagnosis of 
α-Thalassemia in Mainland China: A Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
Yu Yang 1, Dong-Zhi Li 2, Ping He 1 
The aim of the present study was to determine the 
cost effectiveness of a noninvasive prenatal 
diagnosis (PND) program for α-thalassemia (α-
thal) using ultrasound scan. During a 5-year period, 
1923 pregnancies at-risk for homozygous α(0)-thal 
were recruited into the noninvasive PND program. 
There were 1452 women who avoided invasive 
testing because of a normal ultrasound scan. The 
remaining 
471 
showed 
abnormal 
fetal 
ultrasonographic findings, and invasive testing was 
recommended. The overall cost of running the 
noninvasive PND program was US$213,383, while 
the cost of running the invasive program would 
have been US$554,810. The total savings were 
estimated at US$356,499 for women with an 
unaffected pregnancy with a net saving of US$246 
per capita. This study demonstrated that it is cost 
effective to run a noninvasive PND program for α-
thal in an area where the disease is prevalent, and 
therefore effectively avoiding an invasive test in 
unaffected pregnancies. 
 
J Clin Diagn Res 2013 Dec;7(12):2784-687. 
doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2013/6834.3759. Epub 2013 Nov 
20. 
NESTROFT 
- A Valuable, 
Cost 
Effective 
Screening Test for Beta Thalassemia Trait in 
North Indian Punjabi Population 
Sanjay Piplani 1, Rahul Manan 2, Monika Lalit 3, 
Mridu Manjari 4, Tajinder Bhasin 4, Jasmine Bawa 5 
Background and objectives: Beta-thalassemia 
continues to be a cause of significant burden to the 
society, particularly in the poorer developing 
countries. The objective of the present study was to 
evaluate the validity of "NESTROFT" (Naked Eye 
Single Tube Red Cell Osmotic Fragility Test) as a 
useful screening tool in the diagnosis of beta 
thalassemia trait. 
Material and methods: The present study was 
conducted on 150 subjects in the department of 
haematology in a tertiary health care center in 
north Indian state of Punjab. In group I, 111 cases 
diagnosed as microcytic hypochromic anaemia 
were selected. In group II, 39 individuals (the family 
members of known cases of beta thalassemia 
major) were selected. Complete haemogram, 
NESTROFT and HbA2 levels by electrophoresis 
were done and the results were tabulated and 
analyzed statistically. 
Results: Of the 111 cases in group I, 20 (18%) gave 
positive results with NESTROFT while 91 cases 
(82%) tested negative. In group II, out of 39 cases, 
30 (76.92%) tested positive with NESTROFT while 
9 gave a negative result. In group I, out of 20 
NESTROFT positive cases, only 3 had HbA2 levels 
more than 3.5%. In group II, all the 30 NESTROFT 
positive cases had HbA2 levels more than 3.5%. The 
test showed a sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 
85.47%, a positive predictive value of 66% and a 
negative predictive value of 100%. 
Conclusion: Thus, NESTROFT is a valuable, cost-
effective screening test for beta thalassemia trait 
and appears to be a valid test in rural setting with 
financial constraints. 
 
Prevention programmes 
 
J Med Screen 1998;5(3):120-6. 
doi: 10.1136/jms.5.3.120. 
Cost-benefit analysis of a national thalassaemia 
prevention programme in Israel 
G Ginsberg 1, T Tulchinsky, D Filon, A Goldfarb, L 
Abramov, E A Rachmilevitz 
Objective: In Israel (population 5.7 million) there 
are around 200 known living subjects with 
ESTIMATING THE COST OF THALASSAEMIA CARE:  
TIF’S GLOBAL CONTRIBUTION 
328 
thalassaemia major, of whom around 80% are from 
the northern district. This study aims at examining 
the costs and benefits of a national screening 
programme to prevent thalassaemia in Israel. 
Measurements and main results: The lifetime 
healthcare costs of caring for a person born with 
thalassaemia major are $284,154. The costs of the 
home infusion service (33.1%) actually exceed the 
costs of the chelating agent itself (22.1%). The 
remaining 44.8% of costs are due to stay in 
hospital, operations, outpatient visits, laboratory 
tests, therapists, etc. Lost earnings and premature 
mortality costs account for a further $51,843 and 
$141,944 respectively for each case. A national 
screening programme would cost $900,197 and 
prevent around 13.4 homozygotes being born, at a 
cost of $67,369 for each birth prevented. The 
benefit-cost ratio of the programme to the health 
services is 4.22:1, which increases to 6.01:1 when a 
societal perspective is taken. However, around 13.0 
homozygote births are still expected to occur, the 
majority owing to lack of compliance of patients at 
various stages in the screening process. The 
addition of a national health education programme 
for the higher risk non-Jewish population either 
nationally or in selected regions will incur extra 
costs, which may be covered by increased benefits 
as a result of better compliance with the screening 
programme. 
Conclusion: Israel should start to provide a 
nationwide thalassaemia screening programme as 
the monetary benefits to society (and even to the 
health services alone) will exceed the screening 
programmes costs. 
 
Mediterr 
J 
Hematol 
Infect 
Dis 
2014 
Feb 
17;6(1):e2014012. 
doi: 10.4084/MJHID.2014.012. eCollection 2014. 
Prevention of β Thalassemia in Northern Israel - 
a Cost-Benefit Analysis 
Ariel Koren 1, Lora Profeta 2, Luci Zalman 3, Haya 
Palmor 3, Carina Levin 1, Ronit Bril Zamir 4, Stavit 
Shalev 5, Orna Blondheim 6 
Background: β Thalassemia major is characterized 
by hemolytic anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis 
and hemosiderosis. About 4% of the world 
population 
carries 
a 
Thalassemia 
gene. 
Management includes blood transfusions and iron 
chelation. However, this treatment is costly, and 
population screening may be significantly more 
cost beneficial. 
Purpose: The purpose of the current study is to 
analyze the cost of running a prevention program 
for β Thalassemia in Israel and to compare it to the 
actual expenses incurred by treating Thalassemia 
patients. 
Methods: THREE COST PARAMETERS WERE 
ANALYZED AND COMPARED: the prevention 
program, routine treatment of patients and 
treatment of complications. An estimation of the 
expenses needed to treat patients who present 
with complications was calculated based on our 
ongoing experience in treating deteriorating 
patients. 
Results and conclusions: The cost of preventing 
one affected newborn was $63,660 compared to 
$1,971,380 for treatment of a patient during 50 
years (mean annual cost: $39,427). Thus, the 
prevention of 45 affected newborns over a ten-year 
period represents a net saving of $88.5 million to 
the health budget. Even after deducting the cost of 
the prevention program ($413.795/year), the 
program still represents a benefit of $76 million 
over ten years. Each prevented case could pay the 
screening and prevention program for 4.6 years. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
329 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
330 
11. DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT 
THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
AUTHORS: Amid A., Angastiniotis M., & Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
As defined by most relevant bodies, “disease burden” is the impact of a health problem as measured by financial 
cost, mortality, morbidity, or other indicators. It is commonly measured by calculating the combination of years 
of life lost due to premature mortality and equivalent ‘healthy’ years of life loss due to disability. In general, it is 
the impact of living with illness and injury and dying prematurely.  
This implies a systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of population health data, which in many 
situations is just not done and accurate data are not available. Rather patchy information is derived from 
publications of small aliquots of patients usually from academic centres. This is particularly true if the disease is 
relatively rare. The requirements for data collection include accurate diagnosis, classification of subgroups of 
disease, patient numbers, complication rates and especially mortality figures. In addition, the impact on quality 
of life and family economics must be considered.  
Disease entities which are present from birth, require lifelong treatment and collect multi-organ complications 
as the patient grows in years as well as resulting in premature death, are particularly difficult to report with 
accurate information. Another factor which complicates data collection and comparison between countries and 
regions is the significant differences in quality of care and availability of adequate treatment modalities to 
manage all patients with equity.  WHO defines quality of care (QoC) as the provision of healthcare services that 
improve desired health outcomes for individuals and populations through effective, efficient, and safe means 
[1] 
It may be asked further on whom this ‘burden’ is, it can be the patient, the family, society, the health service or 
the Ministry of Finance, but in fact all are affected. These concerns are addressed by the Global Burden of 
Disease Study, which is important to know and understand since at central provider level, many decisions are 
based on its results which remain the guide for health policy makers in all countries. 
 
THE GLOBAL BURDEN OF DISEASE STUDY (OR GBD 
PROJECT) 
This study was initiated in the early 1990s by the World Bank, because of concerns that health services around 
the world were not effectively dealing with the health challenges. Major issues causing premature mortality 
and the disability consequent to disease, were not being met because of inappropriate allocation of resources, 
especially in the developing world. Planning should be based on both the prevalence of a given disease or risk 
factor and the relative harm it causes. In the World Development Report 1993 by the World Bank [2] the 
following issues were raised concerning the health systems (see box below): 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
331 
 
 
These sensible housekeeping concerns were then given practical measures by the Global Burden of Disease 
project (GBD) and supported by the WHO. Indicators were developed quantifying the contribution of disease 
and public health concerns. Indicators include the disability-adjusted life years (DALY), which is the number of 
years of healthy life lost due to death and illness. These indicators aid health services to prioritise by identifying 
disadvantaged groups and targeting health interventions [3]. They are all valid points for good health planning 
but at the same time are based on economy and ‘appropriate’ use of funds, aiming to reduce waste. These are 
important considerations, especially when resources are limited, and they support the maximum benefit on a 
population level. When it comes down to the needs of the individual with a rare disease, then the ethics of this 
approach become debatable. Should the rights of the individual be sacrificed to the benefit of the total or 
should the system consider how best to serve all members of the society. A cancer patient who needs surgery 
in this model would be deprived because it is not a cost-effective intervention. But if such a person can afford a 
private investment, then surgery can be made available even if this increases inequality. Health as a human 
right of all cannot be satisfied and inequalities will continue because the limited resources must be allocated to 
benefit the majority. 
The issue we as TIF raise is not that we believe the World Bank or the WHO or the GBD project are wrong 
approaches, but that in their effort to get the best out of limited resources, they have reduced health to a series 
of indices that are used by administrations to prioritise health but often forget the person. In addition, the 
indices used are based on inadequate information and can be often misleading. The objective is to find solutions 
for congenital and chronic conditions which may be rare and so not given priority in service provision. 
Experience, even with the inaccuracies and approximations available to this global review, is that resources to 
adequately address the needs such patients are not allocated, leading to suffering and early death when in fact 
treatment can lead to the growth of productive citizens. In this respect resources, including economic resources 
are wasted more so than if and adequate investment was offered to raise tax-paying citizens as encountered in 
some countries. 
• 
Misallocation of Funds: investing in health interventions of low cost-effectiveness. The 
example given is surgery for most cancers, as compared to the treatment of common 
diseases such as tuberculosis. 
 
• 
Inequity: spending disproportionately to the affluent so that the poor lack quality care. 
 
• 
Inefficiency: wasting money, for example on brand names as opposed to generic drugs, poor 
supervision of staff and underutilization of hospital beds. 
 
• 
Exploding costs: for example, a rapidly growing demand for costly tests and procedures. 
 
• 
Governments are urged to pursue economic growth policies that will benefit the poor  
 
• 
Finance and implement a package of public health interventions to deal with the substantial 
externalities surrounding infectious disease control, prevention of AIDS, environmental 
pollution, and behaviours (such as drunk driving) that put others at risk. 
However, in this report we see no reference to congenital or hereditary disease, which require 
lifelong investment and affect poor and rich alike. Even the ‘The World Summit for Children’ these 
conditions are not mentioned. This has led policy makers to not include the m in their priorities. 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
332 
The GBD continues as an independent project with the support of the WHO and funds from the Bill Gates 
Foundation. It has adopted measures quantified in terms of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) or disability-
adjusted life years (DALYs) [4]. Both of these metrics quantify the number of years lost due to disability (YLDs), 
sometimes also known as years lost due to disease or years lived with disability/disease. One DALY can be 
thought of as one year of healthy life lost, and the overall disease burden can be thought of as a measure of the 
gap between current health status and the ideal health status (where the individual lives to old age free from 
disease and disability). A cost-effective policy or intervention is measured by the ratio of cost to health benefits 
or DALYs gained. 
Cost effectiveness according to the 1993 report is difficult to estimate, since costs vary between countries and 
outcome measures are difficult to estimate in complex multi-organ diseases in which morbidity is often difficult 
to monitor, and survival is variable. 
 
THE BURDEN OF β-THALASSAEMIA 
Morbidity in β-thalassaemia is due the effects of the primary condition - anaemia, ineffective erythropoiesis 
with expansion of haemopoietic tissue, organomegaly, poor growth and fragile bones. These are partially, 
rarely totally, corrected by blood transfusion. Then, starting from childhood, tissue damage starts due to the 
toxicity of unbound iron. This tissue damage increases with age leading to organ dysfunction in heart, 
endocrines and liver mainly. The degree to which these effects are present in individual patients will depend on 
availability, individual tailoring and adherence to iron chelation, so that in a population of patients a spectrum 
of morbidity is encountered. The level of morbidity will also determine the quality of life but also the mortality 
rate in a given population. 
 
 
All the measures proposed, whether years of potential life lost (YPLL) or DALYs, must rely on data very difficult 
to come by [5]. As recorded in this Global Review of Thalassaemia Services, very few centres treating patients 
keep registries and very few countries keep a national registry of patients even to know patient numbers, let 
alone to record morbidity and mortality data. Classifying haemoglobin disorders according to these measures 
and comparing their public health importance to other diseases is therefore, largely based on calculations or 
even guesswork. Better data collection should become a goal and should be promoted in all countries. At the 
same time, there is a need to better understand how the term ‘burden’ is applied to conditions that manifests 
at birth, progress throughout life with increasing organ involvement but yet with an appropriate therapeutic 
The extent of morbidity or the complication rates, measured by various parameters, is a reflection of the 
quality of clinical management as well as patient adherence. Patient adherence is often episodic, with 
periods when tissue damage alternates with periods when intensified iron chelation partially rescues the 
vital organs. Over time there is a cumulative effect, with increasing organ dysfunction and so disability 
becomes established to varying degrees. Effective management by the conventional clinical tools 
available today will minimise these catastrophic effects. The clinical interventions required to prevent and 
manage these complications are complex and expensive, requiring clinical expertise and organisation 
which in turn mean adequate investment at central government level. Many countries are reluctant to 
make this investment to the extent required, deciding that there are other priorities for the limited 
resources available. The result is that many patients, are treated sub-optimally; in fact, the majority of the 
global thalassaemia population is included. Sub-optimal treatment is self-defeating since it allows 
complications to increase and premature death to be the final outcome, increasing instead of decreasing 
the burden of thalassaemia. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
333 
approach such as applying conventional treatment, can result in long survival with a good quality of life. The 
number of data items that need to be collected and appropriately recorded to add up to a meaningful concept 
of the term ‘burden’ in thalassaemia is demonstrated in a series of recent published attempts to estimate 
burden [6, 7]. 
 
 
 
Quality of life and functionality status, mental and emotional effects of patients and the repercussion on the 
family and social environment have to be incorporated in the equation. 
Measures that only consider one or two of these aspects, will not portray the whole spectrum or describe the 
real burden. Reliance on a single measure can be very misleading where any chronic disease is concerned and 
the effect on public health and individual wellbeing. 
There is no challenge to the philosophy of a disease classification which utilises the prevalence of a disease 
along with the outcome – both morbidity and mortality.  
TIF, as a humanitarian organization, cannot adopt an isolated economic model. A more analytical and critical 
look at the impact of thalassaemia on patients and on society is required demonstrate the obvious inequalities 
across the world and use any proposed tools to promote health policies which reduce inequalities. We need to 
use our burden of disease measures to show what can be done by quality care and provide policy makers with 
tools to measure their own achievements or deficiencies. Monitoring progress cannot rely on costs alone, which 
may lead health authorities to adopt prevention measures alone without increasing support to patients.  
An issue that makes comprehensive assessments even more important is the advent of newly approved 
treatments which may also be curative. Affordability is a major obstacle increasing the inequalities, allowing 
Disease burden in β-thalassaemia is a complex concept which needs several parameters to adequately 
define: 
1. 
The total number of patients – including the total needing treatment and those needing partial 
treatment 
2. The age distribution of these patients, since the needs of each age group are different. This 
demonstrates both the degree to which prevention of affected births is effective but also the 
effectiveness of clinical services provided and contributed to reduction in mortality. 
3. 
Complication rates – these vary from population to population according to timely interventions 
and quality of care 
4. The needs in the treatment modalities: Blood transfusion, iron chelation, monitoring and 
treating complications (mainly but not confined to allo-immunisation, heart disorders, liver 
disease, endocrine conditions, renal complications etc.)  
5. Loss of productivity – can this be expressed in terms of DALYs? DALYs is a summary measure 
that combines mortality and morbidity measures, assessing non-fatal outcomes. 
6. The degree of social support in place, including the degree financial coverage for treatment and 
reduction, if possible elimination, of out of pocket expenses. 
7. 
The cost of all these parameters is essential to assess, since economic burden will indeed 
determine resource allocation. However, costs alone are an incomplete measure since they fail 
to capture pain and suffering that impact on the quality of life of the patients themselves and 
importantly their families. 
8. Quality of life elements (pain, discomfort, anxiety/depression, effect on daily activities) 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
334 
the wealthy to become transfusion free while the majority continue on inadequate conventional therapy, 
thereby increasing disease burden. 
The parameters of disease burden described above are developed separately in each chapter of this review. The 
classification of anaemias in the recent GBD report, where in 2019 haemoglobinopathies are mentioned in the 
17th position of the 0-9 age group in terms of DALYs, but not in any other age group [8]. Indeed, thalassaemia 
is a lethal disease of childhood in most parts of the world even though the privileged now survive to the sixth 
decade or more. This ‘positioning’ is based on disability weights which for thalassaemia were found to be 0.501 
(0.403-0.600) in 2016 and 0.485 (0.425-0.545) in 2019, the difference presumably being due to reduced mortality 
[9]. It is recognized that haemoglobinopathies are a significant source of death and disability. {Disability 
weights represent the magnitude of health loss associated with specific health outcomes and are used to 
calculate years lived with disability (YLD) for these outcomes in a given population. The weights are measured 
on a scale from 0 to 1, where 0 equals a state of full health and 1 equals death}. 
 
THE TIF EXPERIENCE OF MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY 
OF β-THALASSAEMIA 
From the incomplete data in TIF’s possession, there is a global population of over 800000 patients with β-
thalassaemia and almost 60,000 new cases are being added each year. The global prevalence could be 
significantly higher acknowledging the absence of effective prevention in most countries. However, one may 
understand that an almost equal number to those born annually, dies at an early age due to suboptimal care. 
Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemias may have a better life expectancy [10, 11]. 
 
RESULTS CONCERNING THE BURDEN OF DISEASE 
ACCORDING TO WHO REGIONS 
 
East Mediterranean Region Haemoglobinopathy Status 
Introduction 
The East Mediterranean region of WHO includes all Arab speaking nations with the exception of Algeria; it also 
includes Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan. The total population is over 740 million inhabitants. In this large group 
of countries there is great diversity in economic and social development, which is reflected also in the quality 
and availability of services for haemoglobin disorders. One unifying element is that in all countries of the region 
Islam is the prominent religion, which is accompanied by similar cultural attitudes that may affect issues like 
prevention. Another common practice in all these states is the high rate of cousin marriage which has an effect 
on the birth incidence of inherited disorders such as thalassaemia. 
Another characteristic, especially of the Arab nations is the high prevalence of both thalassaemia and sickle cell 
genes. This results in increased incidence of beta thalassaemia, homozygous sickle cell anaemia and HbS/beta 
thalassaemia patients, increasing the burden of these disorders on patients, families and the health system. 
In this report we attempt to describe the current situation of haemoglobinopathy services in the region in 
relation to the health systems and quality of services as affected by economic and political factors. The huge 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
335 
diversity concerning economic development, the high level of displaced populations and the armed conflicts 
which affect many areas of the region make haemoglobin disorders a public health issue of great concern. In 
the midst of pressing problems, patients who need lifelong complex services are often forgotten or sacrificed 
to other priorities, resulting in poor outcomes. 
Socio-economic development 
• 
In 5 countries more than 25% of the population is living below the international poverty line, i.e. 1.90$ 
/ person/ day as defined by the World Bank (current IPL is 2.15$/person/day, affecting 9.2% of the 
world’s population) 
• 
There is generally a low investment in health 
Table 1. Socioeconomic and Health Investment Indicators in the EMR 
Country  
HDI rank 
WB rank 
HE/cap WHO 
data 
HE/%GDP 
WHO data 
UHC index 
Afghanistan 
0.478 low 
LIC 
81$ 
15.5% 
41/100 
Bahrain 
0.875 VH 
HIC 
1110$ 
4.72% 
76/100 
Djibouti 
0.509 low 
LMIC 
63$ 
2.01% 
44/100 
Egypt 
0.731 high 
LMIC 
151$ 
4.36% 
70/100 
Iran  
0.774 high 
UMIC 
573$ 
5.34% 
74/100 
Iraq  
0.686 med 
UMIC 
202$ 
5.08% 
59/100 
Jordan 
0.72 high 
LMIC 
299$ 
7.5% 
65/100 
Kuwait 
0.831VH 
HIC 
1533$ 
6.31% 
78/100 
Lebanon 
0.706 high 
LMIC 
994$ 
7.95% 
73/100 
Libya 
0.718 high 
UMIC 
381$ 
3.89% 
62/100 
Morocco 
0.683 med 
LMIC 
187$ 
5.99% 
69/100 
Oman 
0.816VH 
HIC 
845$ 
5.33% 
70/100 
Pakistan 
0.544 low 
LMIC 
36$ 
2.95% 
45/100 
Palestine 
0.715 high 
UMIC 
 
• 
 
• 
 
Qatar 
0.855 VH 
HIC 
2188$ 
4.18% 
76/100 
Saudi Arabia 
0.875 VH 
HIC 
1211$ 
5.54% 
74/100 
Somalia 
Not rated 
LIC 
• 
 
• 
 
27/100 
Sudan 
0.508 low 
LIC 
23$ 
3.02% 
44/100 
Syria 
0.577 med 
LIC 
89$ 
3.05% 
64/100 
Tunisia 
0.731 high 
LMIC 
223$ 
6.34% 
67/100 
UAE  
0.911 VH 
HIC 
2192$ 
5.67% 
82/100 
Yemen 
0.455 low 
LIC 
64$  
4.25% 
42/100 
 
• 
Pure economic criteria do not always reflect service development. For example, Iraq and Palestine are 
classified as upper middle-income countries but political and social disturbances over the years have 
not allowed them to fulfil their potential despite having given priority to services for haemoglobin 
disorders.  
• 
The Human Development Index (HDI) is a statistical composite index of life expectancy, education 
(expected years of schooling of children at school-entry age and mean years of schooling of the adult 
population), and per capita income indicators. It expresses human development beyond purely 
economic criteria and is a better reflection of the ability of countries to deal with health issues 
especially where complex services are required. The under 5 mortality rate, in the absence of 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
336 
thalassaemia mortality data and since untreated patients will contribute to this indicator, reflects the 
HDI index: those countries with a low HDI score are exactly those with an under 5 mortality rate of 
more than 30/1000 livebirths. On the other hand, those with an under 5 mortality of <10/1000 are those 
with a very high HDI score.      
• 
UHC service coverage index combines 14 tracer indicators of service coverage into a single summary 
measure, as a measure of SDG Indicator 3.8.1. Coverage of essential health services, defined as the 
average coverage of essential services based on tracer interventions that include reproductive, 
maternal, newborn and child health, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases and service 
capacity and access, among the general and the most disadvantaged population. The indicator is an 
index reported on a unitless scale of 0 to 100, which is computed as the geometric mean of 14 tracer 
indicators of health service coverage. The tracer indicators are as follows, organized by four 
components of service coverage: 1. Reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health 2. Infectious 
diseases 3. Noncommunicable diseases 4. Service capacity and access. Examples of a satisfactory UHC 
index are 81/100 for Cyprus, 85/100 for France, 77/100 for Greece, and 88/100 for UK. Concerning the 
services to thalassaemia patients, it seems that countries with UCH index >71 provide free and good 
quality services (Bahrain, Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Qatar and UAE), those with an index between 60-70 
seem to have developing services (Egypt, Oman, Jordan, Morocco, Syria and Tunisia) while those 
whose index is 40-50 have poor services and patients have to rely on family resources to obtain the 
needful (Afghanistan, Iraq, Pakistan, Sudan and Yemen representing 51.4% of the region’s population). 
Djibouti, Somalia and Libya are relatively low incidence areas and are left out of this equation. The 
correlation of services and family spending for services with the UHC index needs further investigation.    
• 
The EMR is a populous region with over 740 million inhabitants. Yet health spending is restricted. 
Taking the health expenditure per capita as an indicator only 5/21 countries actually spend more than 
1000$/capita (serving 7.3% of the region’s population); another 7/21 countries spend 200-1999$/cap 
(22.5% of the region’s population; 9/21 countries spend <199$/cap and these host 70.2% of the region’s 
population.  
• 
Currently many thalassaemia patients are hoping to survive amid protracted emergencies in Syria, 
Afghanistan, Yemen and Palestine (Gaza mainly). This includes natural disasters such as earthquakes 
affecting NW Syria and floods in Libya.  
• 
According to a UNICEF report (2020) 22.5 percent of children in the general population under 5 years 
of age were stunted, 9.2 percent wasted, and 9.9 percent were overweight. The Arab region also 
ranked second for adult obesity in the world in 2019, with 27 percent of the adult population obese. 
https://www.unicef.org/mena/reports/enhancing-resilience-food-systems-arab-states Basic health 
and nutrition issues are of general concern but also reflect on the health of haemoglobinopathy 
patients. 
• 
Migrations and refugees: 
Jordan: 4/10 people living in Jordan are migrants (https://www.iom.int/countries/jordan). 658000 are Syrian 
registered in the country, but a total of 1.3 million are estimated with those living outside the camps (UNHCR  
https://www.unicef.org/jordan). 85% of these live below the poverty line. Possible 185 thalassaemia patients 
among them. In addition, there are 2 million registered Palestinian refugees. Of these 370000 (18%) are hosted 
in 10 recognised camps. Also 67000 Iraqis, 15000 Yemenis, 6000 Sudanese. There are a possible 450 
thalassaemia patients from this group [12].  
Lebanon: hosts 1.6 million refugees mostly from Syria. Almost 90% are in extreme poverty. 
Internally displaced persons: there are 12.6 million internally displaced people (IDPs) in the MENA countries.  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
337 
Yemen: In this country of prolonged civil conflict, 78% of the population is living below the poverty line, making 
life even more precarious for the 90,700 refugee and asylum-seekers and 4.5 million displaced Yemenis 
North-west Syria: where 2.7 million people were already displaced, and 4.1 million people are reliant on 
humanitarian aid. 
 
Table 2. Overall health status in the region 
Country  
IMR/1000 livebirths 
Unicef 2020 
Under 5 
mortality/1000 
livebirths 
Life 
expectancy 
Healthy life 
expectancy at birth 
HALE 
Afghanistan 
44.97 
58 
64.23 
53.9 
Bahrain 
5.97 
6.8 
80.69 
65.9 
Djibouti 
47.18 
55.9 
63.71 
58.0 
Egypt 
16.65 
19.5 
70.81 
63.0 
Iran 
11.14 
12.9 
76.97 
66.3 
Iraq 
21.32 
25.2 
72.05 
62.7 
Jordan 
12.92 
15.0 
75.02 
67.6 
Kuwait 
7.58 
8.9 
80.45 
70.1 
Lebanon 
5.97 
7.0 
76.07 
66.0 
Libya 
9.53 
11.1 
73.25 
65.2 
Morocco 
16.02 
18.7 
75.20 
63.7 
Oman 
6.45 
11.0 
78.97 
64.7 
Pakistan 
54.15 
65.2 
67.34 
56.9 
Palestine 
14.2 
 
74.28 
 
Qatar 
4.93 
5.8 
81.73 
67.1 
Saudi Arabia 
5.99 
7.0 
78.10 
64.0 
Somalia 
 
114.6 
57.35 
49.7 
Sudan 
39.92 
56.6 
66.10 
59.9 
Syria 
18.45 
22.4 
72.45 
62.9 
Tunisia 
14.29 
16.6 
76.94 
66.9 
UAE 
5.62 
6.6 
80.46 
66.0 
Yemen 
45.71 
59.6 
64.52 
57.5 
 
Table 3. Available services 
Country  
Doctors 
/1000 pop 
Density of 
nurses per 
1000 
people 
MRI density 
per million 
population  
VNRD as 
% of total 
donations 
National 
haemovigilance 
program 
Afghanistan 
0.254 
0.4 
0.1 
40.5% 
no 
Bahrain 
0.92 
2.5 
2.3 
99.5% 
No 
Djibouti 
0.2 
0.7 
No data 
No data 
No data 
Egypt 
0.45 
1.9 
No data 
14.3% 
no 
Iran  
1.58 
2.1 
3.8 
100% 
yes 
Iraq  
0.71 
2.4 
1.63 
No data 
No 
Jordan 
2.56 
3.3 
3.92 
50% 
Yes 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
338 
Country  
Doctors 
/1000 pop 
Density of 
nurses per 
1000 
people 
MRI density 
per million 
population  
VNRD as 
% of total 
donations 
National 
haemovigilance 
program 
Kuwait,  
2.29 
7.4 
5.3 
70% 
no 
Lebanon,  
3.2 
1.7 
8.3 
No data 
no 
Libya 
1.9 
6.5 
7.0 
No data 
No 
Morocco,  
0.73 
1.4 
0.7 
75% 
yes 
Oman,  
1.99 
3.9 
4.4 
100% 
no 
Pakistan, 
0.98 
0.5 
0.22 
10.5% 
yes 
Palestine,  
No data 
No data 
5.5 
No data 
No data 
Qatar,  
2.49 
7.2 
11.2 
100% 
No data 
Saudi Arabia 
2.76 
5.8 
3.0 
40% 
yes 
Somalia,  
0.02 
0.1 
No data 
35% 
No 
Sudan,  
0.28 
0.8 
0.32 
17% 
no 
Syria 
1.46 
1.5 
No data 
No data 
No data 
Tunisia 
1.22 
2.5 
0.54 
34% 
yes 
U A E  
2.88 
5.7 
10.6 
93.5% 
yes 
Yemen. 
0.2 
0.8 
1.15 
41% 
no 
 
• 
Data on blood transfusion is from the WHO Global Status Report on Blood Safety and availability 2016 
(most data from 2013 reports). These figures may have improved since then; but for patients who have 
all their lives dependency on transfusions the indication is of long-term deficiencies in quantity and 
quality of blood.  
• 
MRI density / million inhabitants: 1 magnet/million is regarded as the minimum adequacy. This means 
that Afghanistan, Morocco, Pakistan, Sudan and Tunisia have no possibility to serve thalassaemia iron 
measurements, while Iraq, and Yemen will also have difficulties to provide machine time.  
• 
Whole blood processed into components in this region is 65% of donated blood, compared to 99% in 
Europe. 
 
Table 4. Epidemiology of haemoglobin disorders 
Country  
β-thal 
carriers 
HbS 
carriers 
Expected β-
thal patient 
births/1000 
Expected 
SCD 
births/1000 
Known 
β-thal 
patients  
Known 
SCD 
patients 
Afghanistan 
3.8 
(Delacour 
2013) 
0 
0.361 
0 
16500 
0 
Bahrain 
2.9 
13.8 
0.210 
6.0 
21 
600 
Djibouti 
0 
? 
 
 
 
 
Egypt 
5.3 
0.3 
0.702 
0.082 
9258 
1166 
Iran  
4 
1 
0.4 
0.225 
20777 
2000 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
339 
Country  
β-thal 
carriers 
HbS 
carriers 
Expected β-
thal patient 
births/1000 
Expected 
SCD 
births/1000 
Known 
β-thal 
patients  
Known 
SCD 
patients 
Iraq 
4.8 
0.7 
0.576 
0.18 
19955 
6075 
Jordan13 
3.5 
1.5 
0.306 
0.319 
1450  
216 
Kuwait 
2.12 
6 
0.112 
0.274 
475 
600 
Lebanon 
2.3 
1.8 
0.132 
0.288 
375 
387 
Libya 
1.5 
2 
0.056 
0.250 
? 
? 
Morocco  
1.67 
1.76 
0.07 
0.224 
500 
? 
Oman (Al Riyami 2001) 
2.2 
5.8 
0.121 
1.479 
591 
8000 
Pakistan 
6 
0.25 
0.900 
0.077 
50000 
? 
Palestine 
4 
1.25 
0.401 
0.288 
864 
131 
Qatar  
3 
5 
0.225 
1.375 
163 
354 
Saudi Arabia 
2.37 
4.24 
0.14 
0.951 
8919 
26000 
Somalia 
0 
rare 
 
 
 
 
Sudan 
3.9 
2.4 
0.380 
0.612 
665 
? 
Syria 
5 
0.5 
0.625 
0.131 
7700 
1200 
Tunisia 
2.21 
1.9 
0.122 
0.3 
742 
1526 
UAE  
3 
1.1 
0.225 
0.175 
2000 
? 
Yemen 
4.4 
2.2 
0.484 
0.605 
800 
11000 
 
Because of the scarcity of national registers and the often-small sample surveys, epidemiological data for the 
region is incomplete. However, even inaccurate data on carrier frequency, still indicate that the region is rich in 
the prevalence of both thalassaemia and SCD. TIF contacts in each country have reported the numbers of 
patients and for β-thalassaemia the number exceeds 140000, while sickle cell patients are at least 60000 but 
with data missing for several populations of the region. The numbers alone are indicative of a high burden of 
disease, which is increased by inadequate case management in many locations leading to an increase in 
complications and premature death.  
In the EMR, Iran has one of the best records of thalassaemia management and this is reflected in the age 
distribution of patients. In an analysis of 1831 patients in Northern Iran [14] (about 10% of the Iranian 
thalassaemia population), the mean age of patients was 30 ± 9.7 years (76% TDT). This can be compared to a 
report from neighbouring Iraq where 65% of patients were <18 years and 35% > 18-35 years (in contrast, in Italy 
68% were aged ≥35 years and 11% were aged ≤18 years). 
One factor increasing the prevalence of haemoglobin and other hereditary conditions in the EMR is the 
customary practice of cousin marriage in all countries of the region. This is expressed as the inbreeding 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
340 
coefficient >0·0156 (inbreeding coefficient measures the proportion of loci where the offspring of 
consanguineous marriage is predicted to receive identical gene copies from both parents).  
 
Country notes, indicating latest burden of disease and outcomes: 
Afghanistan: the political upheavals have not allowed investment and policies to address the needs of TDT 
patients. There is lack of information and epidemiological data crucial to policy, services and interventions. 
Because of low UHC index, patients of low economic status cannot afford basic treatment, and often neglect 
seeking treatment. Child Foundation (an international NGO, active mainly in Iran) funds the only free 
thalassemia paediatric clinic in Afghanistan, which treats nearly 200 patients who need blood transfusions and 
other treatments. The clinic is part of Mazar-e Sharif Hospital. Most of thalassemia patients have limited access 
to regular and safe blood transfusions. (Qaderi et al 2021)15. Around 300 new affected births per year are 
expected and the figure of 16500 for existing patients was quoted by an NGO LSOA (Life Saving Organisation 
of Afghanistan), active in the care of thalassaemia patients in 2012 (certainly out of date but no new information 
is available). There is no prevention programme. 
Bahrain: this is mainly a sickle cell prevalence country with a haemoglobinopathy programme going back to 
1984. This includes a prevention programme based on obligatory premarital screening; in a recent analysis 
(Bahram S 2023)16 67% of at-risk couples decided to proceed with their marriage; there is a positive attitude 
toward IVF with PGD by 60% of at-risk couples. Concerning patient care it is noted that in a recent survey of 
caregivers, 14.8% reported catastrophic health expenditure and other practical difficulties in providing care for 
sickle cell patients, including dissatisfaction with hospital facilities, and insufficient healthcare services. This in 
a country with high HDI and long-term service development. However, in a survey of families’ catastrophic 
health expenditure occurred in 14.8% of caregivers (Al Saif K 2022)17. In addition, the survey revealed 
dissatisfaction with hospital facilities, and insufficient healthcare services. These are suggestive that quality of 
care and patient satisfaction are not simply a matter of economics. Patient centred care requires staff education 
as well as organisation of the patient journey.  
Egypt: From a sample of 200 patients with beta-thalassemia major (mean age 24.6840± 5.30761), attending 
one clinic, 48% had a ferritin level >3500 ng/mL with a total of 72.5% above 2500 ng/Ml. According to BMI 
measurements 23.5% were underweight and 9.5% overweight. There is need to pay attention to iron overload 
in Egypt reference centres (Ibrahim AS 2023)18 as the effect will be an increasing complication rate and a threat 
to life. In another study involving 30 young thalassaemia patients (ages 14.77±2.45), LIC was 13.40 (8.86–25.00) 
mg Fe/g dw, while the median (IQR) cardiac T2* was 18.7 (2.1–17.1) ms. The β-TM patients in this small study 
had no clinical heart disease with a mean EF% and FS% of 65.7 ± 8.41 and 36.63 ± 6.47, respectively, yet the 
longitudinal systolic strain values by STE were significantly lower compared to standard control values which 
might reflect an early LV dysfunction. In this study also iron overload is evident (Tantawy et al 2022)19.  
In a survey of thalassaemia patients aged from 2-12 years (mean 11.34), 9.17% already had hypothyroidism, 
7.5% had disturbances of glucose homeostasis (not diabetes), 6.66% had hypoparathyroidism, and 66.7% were 
regarded as malnourished based on Z- scores of BMI. These results may seem similar to those of other 
countries, but the age group of patients is much younger; this indicates poor management, which is confirmed 
by a very low pretransfusion haemoglobin (6.82g/dl mean, 7.5 median) and a high serum ferritin (mean 3631) 
[20]  
These reports from reference centres in the country, are indicative of an as yet reduced patient care system 
with an increasing disease burden as they survive to adulthood. Furthermore, economic difficulties on a national 
level did not allow the purchase of chelating agents during several months of 2024; this is bound to increase the 
disease burden of the 10000 or so thalassaemia patients living in Egypt and results will be obvious during the 
coming years, even if the deficit is corrected.  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
341 
A premarital screening program was initiated this year and has already reached almost one million individuals 
(Dr Mona Hamdy personal communication). From the first 250000 cases, 1.8% are β-thalassaemia carriers and 
0.45% are sickle cell carriers, result much lower than those reported from surveys over past years.   
Iran (Islamic Rep. of): Iran is also a country with a high burden of β-thalassaemia. Over the years services have 
developed and experienced gained in both disease prevention and management. Centres of expertise have 
developed in main urban centres where the condition is most prevalent. 
Survival and other outcome indicators reflect the quality of care in this country. However, published figures may 
not represent the total thalassaemia population in a country. In an analysis of 1831 patients in Northern Iran 
(about 10% of the Iranian thalassaemia population), the mean age of patients was 30 ± 9.7 years (76% TDT) [14]: 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of 1385 transfusion-dependent patients by age and gender, Mazandaran Province, 2016 
 
In this group cardiac iron was measured by MRI was similar to that found in reference countries. However, liver 
iron was much higher in that only 14.6% had an LIC <3. In another major centre, reviewing endocrine 
complications in 2019 [21], hypogonadism and bone disease were reported much higher than in reference 
countries, while diabetes and hypothyroidism were much the same.  
In a much larger cohort [22] of 5491 patients from various parts of the country, the mean age was only 23.8 ± 
11.3 years (71.7% TDT). 
In another study from Iran, features of QoL correlated to the patients' laboratory findings, such as liver function 
and fasting blood sugar, as well as education, indicating that quality of care and outcomes of treatment play a 
significant role in estimating the quality of life and the burden of disease [23] . 
In 2016 [24] the annual cost to treat each patient with major thalassaemia was estimated to be 8,321.8$ 
according to World Bank data GDP/capita in 2017 was 5,520.3$. Average family income would be less, and so 
universal health coverage supports patients, even though access to some services (such as MRI) is limited. The 
cost of preventing the birth of any major thalassemia patient through screening was calculated to be US$32 
624. The lifetime treatment cost of any thalassemia major patient was US$136 532. Iran has attempted to 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
342 
reduce birth incidence while upgrading patient care despite an economic embargo which is limiting its ability 
to import medications.  
Iraq: The total number of patients in Iraq from reports communicated by the national Thalassaemia Committee, 
based on reports from the various treatment centres in the country there are around 17624 thalassaemia 
patients, of which 8611 are thalassaemia major. In addition, there are 7800 patients suffering from sickle cell 
syndromes. Programming at central level for thalassaemia services is under way and patients receive support 
for their treatment. 
A cohort of 150 patients from Dohuk are reported [25]. This is a young cohort representing about half of the 
attendees, so they present with low ratios for organic complications like heart disease and diabetes. The high 
and the high positivity rate for HCV (35.3%), are danger signals for this group if management is not upgraded 
soon. These results are representative of many patient outcomes in which services meet with obstacles in their 
development, either economic or political. In this study published in 2020, the following findings are 
summarised: 
• 
The median age of the enrolled patients was 13 years (range: 1–35 years), and only 2.0% were 30 years 
or older. In Iraq the bulk of β-TM patients are children or adolescents. This confirms an older report 
from a peripheral unit where the higher percentage of patients were at age < 10 y. (47.2%) [26]  
• 
The mean pre-transfusion haemoglobin was 8.6±1.0 g/dL, and it was maintained ≥ 9.0 g/dL in 38.7% 
of patients 
• 
Thalassaemic faces were noticeable in around half of the patients (50.7%) 
• 
The median serum ferritin was 2762 μg/L, with 53.3% of the patients having serum ferritin in excess or 
equal to 2500 μg/L. 
This is evidence of suboptimal management, which may be worse in other parts of the country, confirming 
other studies which point to an uneven level of care.  
In a survey of 242 TDT patients, from Sulaymaniyah (northeastern Iraq) [27], 83 patients were TDT, and the rest 
159 NTDT. The mean age was 17 ± 10.2 years, with a range of (1.4–54 years). Of the TDT patients 65% were <18 
years and 35% > 18-35 years, the following complications were listed: 
• 
Bone disease 75.9%, Growth retardation 44.4% (in those <18years), hypothyroidism 13.4% (in those 
>18years), Diabetes 6% (in those >18 years), Pulmonary hypertension 7.2% (in those >18 years).  
• 
In the same study 159 cases of NDTD patients were studied with reduced incidence of bone 
deformities, osteoporosis, growth retardation and diabetes.  
• 
There was an increased incidence hypothyroidism (16.8%) and pulmonary hypertension (11.3%) 
including isolated cases of thrombosis, leg ulcers and extra-medullary haemopoiesis.  
• 
Serum ferritin was <1000μ/l in 31.3% of the TDT group and in 76.6% of the NTDT (32% of these were 
regularly transfused). These results indicate a good level of care in this region of Iraq [.] 
A more recent report of the Arab Thalassaemia Forum (unpublished) the following emerged:  
• 
Pre-transfusion haemoglobin is <7g/dl in 35% of patients, 7-9g/dl in 50%, and only in 15% of patients is 
it kept over 10g/dl.  
• 
47% of patients experience various transfusion reactions. 
• 
1% are infected by transfusion transmitted infections (TTI).  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
343 
• 
MRI for iron measurements is not available. 
• 
Complications recorded are in the heart (30%), hypoparathyroidism (13%) and osteoporosis (14%). 
• 
Poor compliance to iron chelation is witnessed generally. 
• 
Peak age of patients is between 16-25 years.  
• 
Secondary education in patients over the age of 16 years is completed by 6.6% and university by 2.8%. 
• 
Causes of death are due to infections (38%), cardiac complications (74.5%) and severe anaemia (4.2%). 
The conclusion is of a country that has central planning for thalassaemia services, including prevention, with 
financial patient support and progress towards universal health coverage (UHC). However, services have not 
reached an equitable level either in patient care or disease prevention (without prevention 1132 new affected 
patients are calculated to be born annually). The country is paying the price of successive conflicts and political 
turmoil. Nevertheless, the existence of national planning and an expert national advisory committee 
encourages progress in Iraq so disease burden should reduce in the coming years.     
Jordan: Despite governmental attentional to thalassaemia over many years. caregivers in Jordan experience 
financial burden associated with regular hospitalization and unpaid leave for employee mothers [28] and the 
need for psychosocial support is emphasised. These remarks are in keeping with the countries UHC index and 
other indicators. Furthermore, 4/10 people living in Jordan are migrants https://www.iom.int/countries/jordan. 
1.3 million are refugees from Syria, while there are 2 million registered Palestinian refugees and others from 
Iraq, Yemen and the Sudan. Some 81% live in urban areas outside of refugee camps, and 85% of these live below 
the poverty line. 82% of these refugees were able to access health services while the rest were unable due to 
inability mostly to afford fees and increasing health cost. This is bound to affect thalassaemia patients. [UNHCR 
Socio-economic situation of refugees in Jordan Q2 2023.pdf] 
According to the National registry in 2017 there were 1450 thalassaemia patients in the kingdom. [29]. 
According to the estimated carrier rate (2-4% mean 3.5%) then there may be 76 new affected births each year 
if no prevention. So, a further 500 new cases may have been added in the last 7 years, even though ongoing 
premarital may have reduced this (no reports on the effectiveness of prevention have been recently published) 
The average annual cost was estimated to be 2,674 JOD (3773.7$) for a single thalassemia Jordanian insured 
patient and 4,627 JOD (6529.8$) for un-insured, while the non-Jordanian patient’ annual cost was estimated 
4,751 JOD (6704.8$) if insured and 6,651 JOD (9386.2$) if un-insured [30]. The Jordanian Ministry of Health 
(MOH) is the sole facility responsible for treating these patients from the pre-marital program until required 
medications regardless of their nationality. This imposes an extra burden to the Jordanian health budget as the 
flow of refugees from Syria and Palestine continues. Such population movements make prevention also difficult 
to implement efficiently. A mandatory National Premarital Thalassemia Screening Program was implemented 
in Jordan in 2004, however, results in terms of affected births prevented are not known. 
Lebanon: Another Middle East country with a long history of thalassaemia control. The average age of a cohort 
of 228 thalassaemia patients treated at the Chronic Care Centre in Beirut is 32.1 years [31]. This alone is 
indicative of improved patient care in this country. 54.4% were employed and university level was reached by 
26.3% subjects, 7.9% reached high school level, and 32.5% have a level less than high school. The existence of 
a national reference centre in the country has contributes to better outcomes despite political and economic 
difficulties. Despite this effort Lebanon is also host to 1.5 million refugees from Syria most of whom have to rely 
on out-of-pocket spending even for primary care services. Medicine and health are amongst the top five reasons 
for a family to resort to debt, according to a UNHCR report [Health access and utilization survey among 
refugees in Lebanon – 2022 UNHCR 2023]. The fate of most patients with chronic disorders like the 
haemoglobin disorders is not known. A minority of thalassaemia patients 138, was catered for by a clinic in the 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
344 
Bekaa Valley created by the Medicines sans Frontier, which catered for children up to the age of 14 years. In this 
charity service a treatment protocol was followed, maintaining a pre-transfusion haemoglobin of 9.24g/dl on 
average and an average serum ferritin level of 2659ng/dl (range 424- 6020ng/dl). Over a period of 5 years and 
having access to the three chelating agents the clinic was able to maintain monitoring parameters to safe levels. 
MRI T2* was also possible for 19 patients. This outcome in a relatively resource poor setting, is a blessing for 
this minority of patients (Issa L et al Abstract 2023 TIF International Conference). The plight of the migrant and 
refugee populations in the Middle East is a major concern.   
As in Jordan the ongoing prevention programme is likely to be hampered by the influx of refugees and the 
disease burden is likely to increase.  
Morocco: Local experts suggest that that there are 1100 thalassaemia patients mean age 16 years, and up to 
5000 SCD patients, but there is no national registry to confirm these figures. Concerning patient care, 95% are 
treated in 8 public university run hospitals. Each of these centres reports yearly to the Ministry and so patient 
numbers are regarded as accurate by the Ministry. Treatment is free. However, access to chelating agents is 
very difficult but the Ministry clams no shortages, rather poor prescribing by the doctors. 
A virtual meeting between The National Ministry of Health, local experts, TIF and representatives of the Arab 
Forum took place on the 22nd of September 2022. The result of the meeting was expressed in a Memorandum 
of Understanding between TIF and The Ministry of Health, which expresses their joint desire to collaborate in 
the areas of prevention and control of haemoglobin disorders, through strengthening the professional 
capacities of medical and paramedical personnel from the ministry of health in this area. The MoU 
recommended the creation of a joint multidisciplinary expert advisory committee, to make suggestions on 
prevention, public awareness, preparation of national treatment guidelines and the organization of various 
activities, including Conferences, Workshops, Forums etc. The lack of prevention is likely to continue increasing 
disease burden along with the increasing complication rates in affected patient population.  
Oman: a recent analysis of liver function and iron load parameters is revealing of current trends in patient care: 
in this study of 91 patients, the median age (IQR) of the subjects was 33 (9) years, and BMI was 23.8 (6.1) kg/m2. 
“Despite regular chelation and blood transfusions, there was a significant iron overload with rising SF levels and 
LIC measurements by MRI. The median SF levels rose from 1309 at the start of chelation to 1881 ng/mL, which 
was statistically significant. There was also a comparable and statistically significant rise in the LIC from a 
median level of 10.2 to 14.2 g/dry wt. of liver. However, with sustained patient education and compliance 
monitoring, it was encouraging to see the results of sustained chelation efforts, with the median LIC decreasing 
significantly to 7 g/dry wt. at the last follow-up [32]. These results do not differ significantly from those of 
advanced centres of Europe and so there is an accepted good level of care at least in one University reference 
centre in the country. In another recent study of 187 patients with β-TM with a median follow-up of 24.9 years, 
those born after 1980 had a lower risk of death (P = 0.005), hypogonadism (P = < 0.0001), and cardiac 
complications (P = 0.004), while overall complication rates were similar to advanced centres [33]. State support 
and universal coverage help in achieving these good results. Family support has also contributed greatly to the 
quality of life of thalassaemia patients [34] 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
345 
 
Figure 2. Overall Survival according to the birth cohort 
These are acceptable results and coupled with the fact that there is ongoing prevention the disease burden is 
likely to improve over the years. In one report 71.5% took a premarital screening test before marriage, even 
though the test is not compulsory and is offered on voluntary basis [35]. In this same study 23.3% cancelled 
engagement upon positive screening results, while 13% of participants continued with marriage for either 
emotional or family reasons. 
Pakistan: This is a low HDI country with a high burden of thalassaemia, and a challenge to service provision. A 
study of 21 parents of children with thalassemia a low level of education but also knowledge only three (14.28%) 
parents declared that they knew that they carried a genetic trait, indicating also poor counselling. Challenges, 
physical, socio-emotional, financial, and familial were detected in this small group [36]. Despite poor resources, 
in the country significant work has been done to improve the thalassemia status of the country; this includes 
the establishment of reforms to private philanthropic organizations which offer services to the majority of 
patients [37]. However, there are no standard management protocols exist; prevention programmes have been 
initiated in most provinces [38] (Khaliq S 2022).  
Patients and families are not adequately supported by the healthcare system. In a recent study of 100 
thalassaemia patients and their families, the total expense incurred on treatment by the end of the month was 
PKR. 5000–10,000 (USD31-62) in a government run hospital, while in the private sector the total expense 
incurred on treatment by the end of the month was around PKR 80,000 (USD500). Around 37% families have 
an average monthly income of PkRs25000 (USD150) only, and as a result they sold their livelihoods to satisfy 
medical expenses, while 31% compromised on their children’s education expenses and 23% curtailed the health 
expenses of their other children. [39]. Apart from the out-of-pocket expenses which often exceed income 
Caregiver lack of knowledge leads to delayed diagnosis but also poor outcomes. To further add burden there is 
social stigma to deal with and poor response to prevention because of ignorance and high consanguinity rate, 
which maintain the birth of around 5-6000 new cases each year [Baqar M, Ahmed JM, Asim M, et al. Experiences 
of family caregivers of children living with thalassaemia-major in Karachi: a phenomenological study. BMJ 
Public Health 2024;2:e001359. doi:10.1136/]bmjph-2024-001359]. 
Such a system of poor support is coupled with poor clinical service and so increasing complication rates and 
early mortality. In this setting charity organisations have been formed to support patients by developing their 
own clinical services. The quality of these independent services is variable but may also be of good standard. 
The result is an uneven level of patient care and outcomes. A saving grace comes from an expanding prevention 
programme which was initiated in the Punjab and is currently expanding in the other provinces. However, 
national figures on prevention are not yet available and despite efforts the bulk of the population is not reached 
[40]. This lack of adequate investment means the burden of thalassaemia is likely to increase in the coming 
years.   
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
346 
Palestine: These are self-governing territories under constant political and economic pressure and the danger 
of armed conflict (which materialised in 2023-24). A recent quality of life study indicated poor scores in all 
domains in 104 patients in the West Bank and Gaza [41]. This is a reflection of both social conditions and clinical 
services in a country offering the best possible services under the circumstances, having given priority to 
haemoglobin disorders. In a 2021 study of 309 patients with b-thalassemia the average age was 23.4 ± 10.4 
years, which is comparable to many countries outside the developed world. However, the pre-transfusion Hb 
level was 8.4 ± 1.4 g/dl, and 73.1% had iron overload with serum ferritin (SF) levels ≥ 1,000 μg/L (mean ± SD = 
3,175.8 ± 3,378.8μg/L, ranging 75.5–17,450.0). MRI was not available to measure iron in heart and liver [42]. 
These are incomplete data, yet they reflect a population of patients who will have increased complications in 
later life and confirms the findings of poor quality of life referred to in the first study. In the 2nd quarter of 2023 
Gaza became a war zone and the fate of the over 300 thalassaemia patients are yet to be known since 
communication was lost. TIF is aware that medications have reached the patient population only sporadically, 
blood transfusion is a problem for many since the needs of casualties are given priority. In addition to 
deteriorating patient care, war casualties have been reported. At least 27 patients have reached Egypt, but their 
fate is also in doubt. Both blood supply and iron chelation are in doubt in this war zone which is currently 
expanding.  
Qatar: this is a high-income country and if income was the only factor, it is expected that patient care would be 
of high quality. In a study of 2018 LIC was assessed by hepatic R2 MRI, an indication of the availability of this 
technology. However, 35% of patients (young patients' age mean: 21.7 years; range 9-35 years) were found to 
have an LIC ≥ 15 mg/g/dw and high serum ferritin (4,488 ± 2,779μg/L); this is a reflection of unmet needs even 
in a high-income setting [43].  
Saudi Arabia: a high-income country with a high burden of haemoglobin disorders especially SCD. Issues 
concerning the adequacy of services can be identified. Blood supply for example depends to a great extent on 
public awareness as well as on organisation of blood drives; it is an issue of community involvement. In a 2021 
study from the eastern provinces indicated that 158 patients for a three-year period, 14,508 units of packed red 
cell units were ordered, and 9,530 units were received that is, 34% of demanded units were not supplied [44]. 
This inevitably will impact Hb levels in these patients and so long-term outcomes. Despite issues like these, the 
Kingdom is adopting policies for ‘Health Sector transformation through Model of Care strategies’, which 
include the development and implementation of dedicated blood disorder programs (Dr Hatoon Ezzat personal 
communication). The premarital screening program established in 2004 has now screened over 5.5 million 
partners. This program was supported by an educational program for counsellors. The screening revealed that 
1.38% are β-thalassaemia carriers and 4.25% are sickle cell carriers. The at-risk marriages have reduced from 
3% in 2004 to 85% in 2020. The program includes a newborn screening program (mainly for SCD and other 
variants, including alpha thalassaemia), A registry of Inherited Blood disorders (IHBD) has been created which 
has comprehensive data on 23481 patients aiming to reach 65000 by the end of 2024. This is a model program 
which can be imitated by other countries of the region.  
Syria: this country has been subject to prolonged conflict which has disrupted services and prevented 
development, severely affecting the prognosis of thalassaemia patients. The prevalence of the condition is 
significant with approximately 5% of the population carrying the beta thalassemia gene. The National 
Thalassemia Program in Syria was established in 1997, aiming to optimize both patient care and prevention. 
The Syrian conflict, since its eruption in 2011, had particularly detrimental effects on thalassemia patients, 
especially those who were displaced. From March 2019, a total of 4,677 patients have been registered to receive 
chronic blood transfusions in the areas under Syrian government control. However, all services have suffered, 
and this includes the loss of trained medical and nursing staff. In the city of Homs before the conflict the median 
age of patients was 14 years whereas in recent years during the conflict the median age is 10 years; economic 
sanctions imposed the conflict disrupted the supply of medications, and a significant percentage (15.1%) of the 
patients had not received any chelation for six years, spanning from 2012 to 2018, due to their being trapped in 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
347 
the armed conflict areas. The median SF concentrations of the patients significantly increased from 3274 ng/ml 
in 2009 to 4672 ng/ml in 2019 (P < 0 0001). Iron overload and poor outcomes are to be expected in this country 
[45]  
United Arab Emirates: High HDI country with long standing services aiming to serve thalassaemia patients as 
well as disease prevention. In a study of 137 TDT (median age of 12 years (range 2-49 yrs), severe iron load in 
the liver (LIC) was noted in 16.1% (≥15 mg/g dw) and normal/mild LIC in 62% (<2-7 mg/g dw). T2* of the heart 
was normal in 83.9% (>20ms) with 6.9% severe [46]. These results are improved compared to other countries 
of the region, especially compared to the results of Qatar with a similar age range of patients.  
One important issue is that 88.50% of the population are expatriates; the majority of these are from India and 
Pakistan while there is a sizable proportion from Egypt. These are ethnic groups rich in thalassaemia genes. In 
recent study [47] of 255 thalassaemia patients, 65.5% were non-UAE nationals; 73.3% were in the > 18 years age 
group while 90.6% had thalassaemia major. The mean total annual direct medical cost per patient was AED 
131,156 (95% CI: 124,735 –137,578) =307963.89 USD, of which ICT was the most expensive component, followed 
by blood transfusions. The median (IQR) household annual income was 96,000 AEDs (26136.57 USD). These 
high costs reflect the wealth of the country For Emiratis there is full coverage while for ex-patriates the extent 
of coverage is determined by the employee's salary and designation. 
 
Conclusions 
The countries of the region have considerable variability in economic and social development. However, as far 
as services for haemoglobin disorders are concerned, even high HDI countries are reporting results which need 
improvement, based on indicators such as iron overload. The large refugee population in the region further 
complicates the prioritisation of haemoglobin disorders. Despite some countries being in the high resource 
group the overall picture of the region requires attention and policies which may favour these chronic patients. 
In the high resource states mainly of the Arab peninsular, there is compulsory health insurance for the large 
migrant population.  
 
WHO South-East Asia Region (SEAR) 
Introduction 
The WHO South-East Asia Region is home to over 2 billion people, a quarter of the world’s population. 11 
Member States - Bangladesh, Bhutan, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, India, Indonesia, Maldives, 
Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste. WHO has country offices in all 11 Member States. The WHO 
South-East Asia Regional office in based in New Delhi India. 
With the Region prone to natural disasters, disease outbreaks and health risks of climate change, one of WHO’s 
key priority is to strengthen emergency risk management for sustainable development. Promoting universal 
health coverage – health for all - and building robust health systems are key priorities. The Region has eight 
flagship priority programmes, aligned to WHO’s global triple billion goals and the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals: 
1. 
Maternal and Child Health: to accelerate reduction of maternal, neonatal and under five mortalities. 
2. Eliminate Measles and Rubella by 2023. 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
348 
3. 
Universal Health Coverage: Continue progressing towards Universal Health Coverage with focus on 
human resources for health and essential medicines. 
4. Neglected Tropical Diseases 
5. Noncommunicable Diseases: Prevent and control noncommunicable diseases through multisectoral 
policies and plans, with focus on “best buys”. 
6. Antimicrobial Resistance: Further strengthen national capacity building for preventing and combating 
Antimicrobial Resistance. 
7. 
Health Emergencies: Scale-up capacity development in emergency risk management in countries. 
8. Ending Tuberculosis: Accelerate efforts to End TB by 2030. 
 
WHO Collaborating centres: As of January 31, 2022, there are 105 active WHO Collaborating Centres across 8 
member states of WHO South-East Asia Region. These include: 
• 
2 on blood safety and Blood Transfusion Services in National Blood transfusion Service Sri Lanka, 
Colombo. Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok 
• 
1 for Strengthening Ethics in Biomedical and Health Research at the Indian Council of Medical 
Research, Bangaluru 
• 
2 for reproductive health, including Birth defect and stillbirth surveillance and a newborn-birth defects 
(NBBD) Database. Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, 
and the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Mumbai. Siriraj Reproductive Health Research 
Centre, Bangkok and Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 
• 
1 for community-based activities in the area of maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health at the 
Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sewagram, Wardha 
• 
1 for NCD prevention and control, through the identification and collation of policies, tools, and best 
practices and research studies on NCDs, enhancing the skills and competencies of doctors, nurses and 
health workers. At the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi 
 
Policies promoted by the Regional Office: 
 
Blood Donation (based on World Blood Donor Day 2023 speech by RD): In the South-East Asia (SEA) Region, 
around 19.4 million units of blood are collected, which constitutes around 0.94% of the region’s population 
donating blood. Ideally, any country’s requirement for safe blood can be met easily if 1 to 3 percent of the total 
population donates regularly. Of the eleven member states, only three have achieved 100% voluntary non 
remunerated donations (VNRDs) while the rest of the member states are striving to achieve 100% VNRDs 
(average of 82% VNRDs in SEA Region). 100% of donated blood is tested for transfusion-transmitted diseases. 
 
Universal coverage: Between 2010 and 2019, the Region increased its UHC service coverage index from 47 to 
61. Between 2000 and 2017, the Region reduced the number of households impoverished or further 
impoverished from out-of-pocket spending on health from 30% to 6%. In 2017, around 299 million people in the 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
349 
Region faced catastrophic health spending, and an estimated 117 million people in the Region were pushed or 
further pushed below the purchasing power parity poverty line of US$ 1.90 a day. An estimated 40% of health 
budgets in low- and middle-income countries are spent on medicines, with much of the cost borne out-of-
pocket by patients. 
 
Manpower development: Since 2014, the density of doctors, nurses and midwives in the Region has improved 
by over 30% – a tremendous achievement. 
 
World Birth Defects Day: Globally, an estimated 8 million newborns are born with a birth defect every year. 
Nine out of every ten children born with a serious birth defect are in low- and middle-income countries. The 
most common severe birth defects are heart defects, neural tube defects and Down syndrome. In the WHO 
South-East Asia Region, birth defects are the third most common cause of child mortality, and the fourth most 
common cause of neonatal mortality, accounting for 12% of all neonatal deaths. Between 2010 and 2019, birth 
defects increased as a proportion of child mortality in the Region, from 6.2% to 9.2%, and in four countries, 
birth defects now contribute to more than 20% of under-five mortality. In 2019, birth defects contributed to at 
least 117 000 deaths in the Region, equal to around 22% of the global total. All Member States have initiated 
hospital-based birth defect surveillance and are implementing national action plans to prevent and manage 
birth defects. Six Member States – Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Myanmar and Nepal – continue to 
support a WHO-developed online database to better track birth defects. To date, the database has recorded 
more than 4.7 million births in the Region, including about 51 000 infants born with birth defects. The Region 
has several priorities: 
• 
First, improving the coverage and quality of preventive interventions such as rubella immunization, 
quality antenatal care 
• 
Second, enhancing health system capacities to detect, treat and care for birth defects, with a focus on 
adapting new WHO guidance on universal screening of newborns for hearing impairment and eye 
abnormalities 
• 
Third, sustaining and expanding surveillance and improving data systems, with a focus on 
strengthening not just coverage and quality, but analysis and application. 
• 
Fourth, increasing support for parents and caregivers for early childhood development and to improve 
disability care. 
“Every child has the right to survive and thrive, with full access to quality and comprehensive health and social 
services. On World Birth Defects Day, WHO reaffirms its commitment to support all countries of the Region to 
urgently strengthen health systems to prevent, detect, manage and care for birth defects, for every child, 
everywhere.” RD speech 
 
Patient Safety: Since 2015 the WHO South-East Asia Region has made targeted efforts to reduce unsafe 
medication practices and errors, with a focus on addressing counterfeit and substandard products, and 
enhancing patient safety and reporting systems. This is in line with the Region’s Strategy on Patient Safety 
2016–2025. Most countries of the Region now have in place national patient safety and/or quality strategies 
that are aligned with the new Global Patient Safety Action Plan 2021–2030. The Plan aims to advance policies, 
strategies and actions to eliminate all sources of avoidable risk and harm to patients and health workers. 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
350 
Child health in the South-East Asia Region: Member States in the Region have demonstrated significant 
progress in reducing newborn and child mortality over the last two decades and the Region achieved the MDG4 
target of two-third reduction in under-five mortality in 2016. The progress has continued during the SDG phase 
and by 2019 five countries in the Region achieved the 2030 target of under-five and newborn mortality and the 
Region as a whole is likely to reach the 2030 target for under-five mortality but may narrowly miss the newborn 
mortality target. In the South-East Asia Region, around 52% of under-five mortality is contributed by deaths 
during the neonatal period. The most common causes of under-five mortality in the Region is the complications 
of prematurity followed by pneumonia and diarrhoea. Commonest causes of neonatal mortality are 
prematurity, birth asphyxia and neonatal infections. However, the coverage of evidence-based interventions 
remains low and uneven in several Member States. There is a large disparity in child health by wealth status, 
residence (rural-urban), mother's education level and social status, not only in mortality but also in the coverage 
of interventions. 
Noncommunicable diseases in the South-East Asia: Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), principally 
cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases, impose a major and growing burden 
on health and development in the South-East Asia Region. In the region, 62% of all deaths are due to NCDs 
accounting for 9 million persons. Of particular concern is the high proportion of premature mortality from NCDs 
(deaths before 70 years of age). 
Research: is indispensable for resolving public health challenges. Research for health spans 5 generic areas of 
activity: 
• 
measuring the magnitude and distribution of the health problem 
• 
understanding the diverse causes or the determinants of the problem, whether they are due to 
biological, behavioural, social or environmental factors 
• 
developing solutions or interventions that will help to prevent or mitigate the problem 
• 
implementing or delivering solutions through policies and programmes; and 
• 
evaluating the impact of these solutions on the level and distribution of the problem. 
A new “Research and Innovation Unit” has been established in January 2022 within the Healthier Population 
and Non-Communicable Diseases (HPN) Department. Vision: Achieving the best possible public health 
outcomes and health equity in South-East Asia Region powered by the latest in science, innovation and 
evidence. Regional strategy on research for health 2018-2022. 
Table 5. Socio-economic development 
Country 
HDI rank 
World Bank 
rank 
HE/cap in USD 
WB data 
HE as % GDP 
WB data 
UHC index 
WB data 
Bangladesh 
0.661 med 
LMI 
50.66 
2.63% 
52 
Bhutan 
0.666 med 
LMI 
133.7 
4.37% 
60 
India,  
0.633 med 
LMI 
56.63 
2.96% 
63 
Indonesia 
0.705 high 
UMI 
132.96 
3.41% 
55 
Maldives 
0.747 high 
UMI 
825.57 
11.35% 
61 
Myanmar 
0.585 low 
LMI 
72.11 
4.62% 
52 
Nepal 
0.602 low 
LMI 
58.31 
5.17% 
54 
Sri Lanka 
0.782 high 
LMI 
151.06 
4.07% 
67 
Thailand 
0.800 v high 
UMI 
305.09 
4.36% 
82 
Timor Leste 
0.607 low 
LMI 
120.87 
9.85% 
62 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
351 
Comments 
This group of countries are generally in the ‘developing’ category with only Thailand, Maldives and Indonesia 
gaining the upper middle-income category. This difference is less obvious when the Human Development Index 
is considered, since Thailand and the Maldives reflect better social development but Indonesia lags with the 
other members of the group and Sri Lanka ranked higher. Overall, as far as health service support is concerned 
the table provides evidence that the Maldives and Timor Leste are spending more on health. In general, 
however, with the exception of Thailand no country in the region offers secure universal coverage to all its 
citizen as reflected in the UHC index (defined in the section for EMR countries). The level of coverage and 
healthcare development that is derived from the table suggests that thalassaemia patients and their complex 
demands on the health system, may not be adequately supported in the countries of the region, while Thailand 
and the Maldives being more likely to offer the necessary services.  
 
The Democratic Republic of North Korea is not included in this discussion both because thalassaemia is very 
rare in the Korean peninsula but also because economic and other data are not available.  
 
This generally poor health development is reflected in the overall health indicators of the populations of these 
counties: 
 
Table 6. Health Indicators and Healthcare Support in Selected South and Southeast Asian Countries 
Country 
IMR/1000 
livebirths 
Under-5 
mortality/1000 
livebirths 
Life expectancy 
Healthy 
life 
expectancy 
at 
birth HALE 
Bangladesh 
29.58 
29.1 
73.98 
64.3 
Bhutan 
23.18 
27.6 
72.49 
64.3 
India  
27.0 
32.6 
72.03 
60.3 
Indonesia 
19.31 
23.0 
71.01 
62.8 
Maldives 
5.27 
7.6 
81.07 
70 
Myanmar 
35.05 
43.7 
67.46 
60.9 
Nepal 
 
23.59 
28.2 
70.78 
61.3 
Sri Lanka 
5.92 
6.9 
76.8 
67.0 
Thailand 
6.36 
8.7 
79.91 
68.3 
Timor Leste 
32.93 
42.3 
69.31 
60.9 
 
In this respect also the Maldives, Sri Lanka and Thailand stand out with indices which approach those of 
developed and resource rich nations. They indicate more organised and effective health services and stand out 
as being categorised as high HDI countries. In contrast the rest indicate a poor performance even though 
improving compared to past years. It is also a reflection of the large populations with often diverse cultures and 
divisions into tribal groups. This picture is reflected in the achievements concerning thalassaemia. 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
352 
Table 7. Available services 
Country 
Doctors/1000 
population 
Density of 
nurses/1000 
population  
MRI density/ 
million 
population 
VNRD as % of 
total 
donations* 
Nat 
haemovigilance  
program 
Bangladesh 
0.7 
0.5 
0.49 
22% 
YES est 2018 
Bhutan 
0.5 
2.1 
1.33 
80% 
Yes 2016-7 
India,  
0.7 
1.7 
0.21 
76% 
Yes 2012 
Indonesia 
0.6 
4.0 
NA 
91% 
Yes 
Maldives 
2.1 
4.7 
2.9 
36% 
No 
Myanmar 
0.7 
1.1 
0.24 
99% 
Not only in 
central est 
Nepal 
0.9 
3.3 
NA 
83% 
Yes 
Sri Lanka 
1.2 
2.5 
0.42 
100% 
Yes 2009 
Thailand 
0.9 
3.2 
NA 
100% 
Yes 2001 
Timor Leste 
0.8 
1.7 
NA 
18-20% 
No 
* Voluntary non-remunerated blood donations to ensure blood safety in the WHO South-East Asia Region to 
support universal health coverage ISBN Number: 978-92-9021-044-3 © World Health Organization 2023 
The indicators used are derived from the needs of thalassaemia patients. Adequate overall manpower is 
inadequate in all of the countries; in contrast the UK and Cyprus have 3.2 doctors/1000. Only the Maldives 
approaches this figure and so he possibility of devoted doctors for haemoglobin disorders is limited in all the 
region. Likewise, the possibility for MRI monitoring of iron load is limited (compare with Cyprus MRI density of 
14/million and Greece of 29/million).  
Blood safety is improving in the region with the exception of Bangladesh, the Maldives and Timor Leste. For 
the rest there remains the question whether good practices are even throughout the country – especially in 
India. 
 
Table 8. Prevalence and Burden of Thalassaemia and HbE Disorders in Selected South and Southeast Asian 
Countries 
Country  
β- thal 
carriers 
HbE 
carriers 
Expected β- 
thal 
births/1000  
Expected 
HbE/β- thal 
births/1000 
Estimated  
 β- thal 
patients 
Estimated 
NTDT 
patients 
Bangladesh 
3.5% 
10.2% 
0.31 
1.7 
12000 
30-40000 
Bhutan 
0.7% 
4% 
0 
0.01 
NA 
NA 
India 
3.9% 
1% 
0.38 
0.2 
150000 
NA 
Indonesia 
5% 
6% 
0.63 
1.5 
10974 
NA 
Maldives 
18% 
0.9% 
8.16 
0.81 
633 
NA 
Myanmar 
0.5% 
26% 
0.1 
0.65 
NA 
4079 
Nepal 
4% 
4.4% 
0.4 
0.88 
600 
NA 
Sri Lanka 
2.2% 
0.5% 
0.12 
0.06 
2000 
NA 
Thailand 
2.9% 
24.6% 
0.21 
3.57 
2070 
96390 
Timor Leste 
5% 
6% 
0.63 
1.5% 
NA 
NA 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
353 
In addition, 4 countries of the region have a significant number of sickle cell carriers: 
• 
India has 3% AS carriers which lead to 0.82/1000 births of SCD syndromes with over 125000 patients 
• 
Maldives has AS 0.13% which leads to 0.12/1000 births and 14 known patients 
• 
Sri Lanka has 0.15% AS which leads to 0.12/1000 births and 51 known patients 
• 
In Nepal AS is said to be 5% but this is confined to one geographical area but could lead to 1.63/1000 
affected births. Total patients are not known  
The whole region has a major prevalence of haemoglobin disorders and yet because of poor resources and 
uneven development of services, thalassaemia services are not given priority in health planning. This is reflected 
in the policies of the regional WHO office which hardly mentions haemoglobin disorders (see the outline of 
polices in the introduction to this section). However, much progress in specific issues such as increasing health 
coverage, blood adequacy and safety and creating reference centres in certain locations which are an example 
for more development. Patient support groups are gaining ground, but prevention programs are very limited in 
the region.  
 
Bangladesh: this is a country of over 160 million people and with many health issues to consider, including 
water-borne diseases, essential nutrition and improved water sanitation and hygiene. There is no national 
registry, but the carrier rate indicates a high prevalence, and the estimate is of over 50000 affected patients. 
According to a study by Khan et al over 10.0% of the patients suffer from Hb E/b-thal and many are NTDT, while 
4.0% have b-thal major [48] . To quote a recent description of the situation “Facilities for blood transfusion are 
not present in all the district hospitals. Furthermore, blood transfusion is also a costly procedure for the patients 
to afford, frequently due to the lack availability. Chelating agents are also very expensive due to low supply” 
[49] []. The treatment is not free and so the patients from weaker economically families are undertreated. 
 The burden of disease in this country is huge while families are not supported adequately to deal effectively 
with the children’s medical needs. Families affected by beta-thalassemia encounter significant financial burden 
due to the high cost of treatment [50].  
Currently, most infants are neither diagnosed nor treated and probably die in early infancy from the 
consequences of anaemia. Organised treatment is only available at the thalassaemia clinics in Dhaka and in 
Chittagong. There are national guidelines since 2019 but not implemented by the majority of treating 
physicians. Blood is not filtered and often whole blood is given. Voluntary donation is inadequate. All three iron 
chelators are available but not free of charge; indeed, patients pay for many services including laboratory tests 
and MRI. Alternative medications aiming to reduce transfusion burden are often used, including thalidomide, 
and hydroxyurea. The result is that iron load is high and co-morbidities increased. Indeed, blood transfusion is 
also a costly procedure for the patients to afford. Moreover, the costs of treatment, even when discounted, are 
beyond the means of the large majority of families, so that only 1% of the thalassaemia population benefit from 
reasonable management [49] 
These findings are similar to a report from a TIF delegation visit in 2019 [Report of a delegation visit to 
Bangladesh, supported by Thalassaemia International Federation, the Ministry of Health and Bangladesh 
Thalassaemia Samity. Telfer P, Petrou M et al 2019]. The team also emphasized the wide variation in prevalence 
across the country: 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
354 
Table 9. Regional Variation in Thalassaemia and HbE Carrier Frequencies in Bangladesh 
Division 
Number 
tested 
Het b-thal 
AE 
EE 
% het b 
thal 
% AE 
% EE 
Barisal 
77 
2 
4 
2 
2.6 
5.2 
2.6 
Chittagong 
260 
17 
20 
1 
6.5 
7.7 
0.4 
Dhaka 
475 
12 
39 
4 
2.5 
8.2 
0.8 
Khulna 
159 
2 
8 
0 
1.3 
5.0 
0.0 
Rajshahi 
338 
14 
44 
0 
4.1 
13.0 
0.0 
Rangpur 
116 
5 
31 
7 
4.3 
26.7 
6.0 
Sylhet 
14 
1 
1 
0 
7.1 
7.1 
0.0 
% of Total 
Tested 
1439 
53 
147 
14 
3.7 
10.2 
1.0 
 
These carrier frequencies are challenged by a recent survey of 1000 university student from 3 districts, using 
capillary electrophoresis and molecular studies; the findings were 1.7% for β-thalassaemia carriers and 5.8% of 
HbE carriers [Khan MA et al. A pilot study- thalassemia screening program in Bangladesh TIF Int Conference 
Abstract 2023]  
Other findings of the TIF delegation were the confirmation that all of the patients were inadequately chelated, 
and transfusions for those with thalassaemia major are generally insufficient, and pre-transfusion Hb is 
generally 6-8 g/dl. These basic findings indicate that there is need for more effort with the health authorities, 
despite other pressing health issues, to improve quality of care. The needs were also demonstrated by a study 
on the Health-Related Quality of life which concluded that “This study found an association between lower 
income, blood transfusion, disease severity, comorbidities, and medical expenses and the deterioration of 
HRQoL among the patients”. The conclusion is that “National action plans are required to guarantee the holistic 
welfare of thalassemia patients” [51] 
 
Bhutan: a small mountain country, with a population less than 800000 people, has a low prevalence of β-
thalassaemia genes and HbE. On the other hand, α-thalassaemia is more common. However, clinically 
important mutations are rare, and little is known about services. 
 
India: Because its large population (now over 1.4 billion) and high prevalence of thalassaemia and sickle cell 
genes India bears a large burden of the global haemoglobinopathy population. The estimate is of 100,000 
thalassaemia patients [52]. Every year 0.5/1000 livebirths will be added suffering from beta thalassaemia and 
HbE/ beta thalassaemia (around 15000 new affected births/ year).  
The distribution of these genes is heterogeneous both geographically and among tribal and linguistic groups. 
In a recent review of the literature the β-thalassaemia carrier rate in the general population amounted to 3.74% 
(95% CI 2.52-4.97) but higher in the tribal groups [53]  
Universal Health Coverage is not yet fully implemented in India even though the government introduced the 
Ayushman Bharat Yojana scheme to bring the healthcare services within the reach of the community. 
Healthcare out-of-pocket expenditure is estimated at around 62.6 per cent of total health expenditure so 
haemoglobinopathy cannot be free of health-related expenses. If the entire present cohort of 150,000 
thalassaemia patients was receiving adequate care, the annual cost would be USD448 million, and with an 
added cohort of 125,000 cases over a decade by 2026, the annual cost of care is predicted to escalate to USD820 
million [54]. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
355 
Even though government hospitals cover the cost of treatment of thalassaemia this is does not satisfy all needs 
and patients supplement by out-of-pocket expenses. There is support from NGOs, but again not all needs are 
satisfied. In a recent estimate of cost for treating children younger than 12 years in Mumbai, the cost was found 
to be US$ 981 per patient per year. Direct costs contributed to 94% of the cost of illness with chelation therapy 
(23%) and blood investigations (21%) being major contributors. Even at subsidized rates, the financial burden 
to the families from lower socioeconomic strata is considerable [55]. Such financial issues result in 
undertreatment but also psychological stress in both patients and families [56]. Overall, the quality of life (QoL) 
of patients (children in a current study) significantly correlates with their carers' CarerQoL, mother's educational 
level, parent's working status, as well as quality care [57].  
Quality of care is variable across India, with some academic mainly centres offering near optimal care, even 
though at a cost, while the majority of patients receive substandard treatment. This is reflected in outcomes. 
One example is the rate of transfusion transmitted infections which in turn reflect quality of blood banking: 
39.9% of regularly transfused children were found to have TTIs with hepatitis C being the most common 
(34.5%), followed by hepatitis B (4.5%) and human immunodeficiency virus (1.8%); this was found to be related 
to the per capita monthly family income as well as the blood transfusion frequency [58]. In another study of 328 
β-TM children attending the thalassemia day care unit of a medical college 48.2% were malnourished with a 
mean body mass index of 13.9 kg/m2; this was related to socio-economic factors such as caste and mothers’ 
education (compare with 7.8 % of children in the USA by Fung et al 2010) [59]. It is noteworthy that most 
reported results involve children with thalassaemia indicating the overall age distribution of patients in India. 
In contrast a report to TIF from expert patients in India (Varesh and Anubha March 2021) involving 740 patients 
across several states, indicate an improving survival: 
 
Table 10. Age Distribution of Thalassaemia Patients in India (Report from Expert Patients, 2021) 
This indicates that 44% are young adults, even though in this cohort there 
may be a selection of treating centres from academic units. The overall 
picture of undertreatment of the majority is not negated, hope however for 
improvement of patient care is present. According to a recent report a 
National Policy has been proposed for the management and prevention of 
hemoglobinopathies that will embark on a comprehensive program, 
providing adequate care and augmenting the existing public health care 
services. It will also include training, genetic counselling and easier access to preventive options and a National 
Registry.  
The overall picture of clinical services for thalassaemia patients in India is one of gradual improvement but the 
journey has not yet reached its goal. In a recent presentation by the Haemoglobinopathies subcommittee of 
the Indian Paediatric Haematology Group [60], it was stated 68 centres across India participated in the survey 
with 11660 patients, and the findings in summary are that MRI T2* is offered in half of these; leukodepleted 
packed red cells are offered in 84% but filters are purchased by the patient in 41% of centres. In addition, one 
third reported difficulty in ‘arranging blood donors’. Concerning patient outcomes, they reported growth 
retardation in 60% of patients, 75% have iron overload, 37% have psychosocial issues and multidisciplinary care 
was available in 62% of centres.   
In a review of the literature concerning quality of life in thalassaemia patients of india it was clear that children 
experience a low QoL, and it was concluded that there is need to increase parental and family awareness, to 
promote the use of support groups, psychosocial counselling, and emotional support [61]. However, improving 
the level of medical care and offering comprehensive financial coverage will go a long way to reducing the 
burden of both the patient, the family and the state. Another suggestion is establishing a robust public-private 
Age group 
% of patients 
<10 years 
25% 
10-20 
30% 
20-30 
25% 
30-40 
15% 
>50 years 
4%  
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
356 
partnership, along with training healthcare providers, private and government doctors in urban and rural areas, 
strengthening the blood bank, and supporting the management of b-TM [62]. 
 
Indonesia: Indonesia has a relatively high incidence of thalassemia, with approximately 3-10% people being 
carriers. According to national data there are over 11000 patients under treatment. The country introduced a 
universal health coverage scheme in 2014 and these patients are included to benefit from free treatment of 
both blood transfusion and iron chelation. However, adjuvants necessary for quality care such as MRI and 
multidisciplinary care are not available across this large territory to all patients. The age distribution of patients 
in this country is not known. In fact, the vast geographical area over which patients are scattered and the 
variable quality of services in each region make it impossible to generalize. Reference centres for thalassaemia 
management are mainly in Jakarta, and so it may be expected that these centres represent the best possible 
care that is offered in the country. One state of art centre is located in the Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital [63]. 
In this unit both children and adults are treated, and all treatment has in recent years been fully supported by 
national health coverage. Patients are regularly monitored, and MRI is available. In a 2018 report from this 
hospital of MRI results on liver and heart iron the measurements on 546 patients are analysed, 56.4% under the 
age of 18 years and 43.6% over 18 years. For the purpose of this report and for comparison with other adult 
populations it was chosen to reproduce the findings of the over-18-year population: heart iron deposition was 
found within normal range (>20ms) in 82.7% of adults which is comparable to countries like Italy Cyprus and 
Greece while liver iron concentration was within normal rage in only 13.4% of the patients. Despite these 
results, the key message here is that patient care can achieve good results in any country, provided that the 
services are supported by universal coverage. 
In a group of young adults from a unit in Java (mean age, 21.5 ± 7.2 years), 15-53 years, the mean hemoglobin 
before blood transfusion was 7.2 ± 1.7 g/dL and mean serum ferritin was 4414.5± 3165.2 ng/mL. [64]. These 
results are evidence of undertreatment, and organ complications are expected. Similar results are reported 
from a reference centre in Jakarta on a group of 30 patients with ages ranging from 13-41 years. The mean 
Serum Ferritin was 9,019.3ng/ml (SD3,889.4) in patients with a cardiac T2* <20ms and 4,118.4 (SD2,373.6) in 
those with a T2* >20ms [65]. Similar findings are still being reported from Indonesian hospitals [66, 67]. The 
reasons given include the availability of iron chelators which is uncertain in some rural areas and poor adherence 
to iron chelation therapy and maintaining pretransfusion haemoglobin to acceptable levels [68]. These findings 
confirm that quality improvement is needed, and international guidelines adopted.  
Deferiprone had a lower mean annual cost of USD 3581 than deferasirox, which had a cost of USD 6004. This 
has been considered and deferiprone was the most common iron chelator used (86.7%). Detailed medical and 
non-medical costs have yet to be calculated so the national health insurance can budget adequately for all 
patients in the country [69].  
 
The Maldives: The Maldives is an island nation with a population currently estimated at over 500,000 people 
located in the lndian Ocean. It consists of 1900 islands, of which 200 are inhabited. It has the world's highest 
concentration of carriers at 16-18% of the population [70, 71] Screening over the years of 110,504 individuals 
indicated a β-thalassemia carrier frequency of 16.2% [72]  
The latest report is of 666 patients registered which amounts to around 1 for every 800 inhabitants. This a 
considerable burden of disease and has led to the recognition of thalassaemia as a major public health issue by 
the Ministry of Health. This has led to long standing programs of raising awareness, screening and patient care. 
There is one reference centre where the majority of patients receive routine treatment freely provided by the 
state. Despite this optimum care is still to be achieved. In a recent survey about 46% of patients have a serum 
ferritin below 2500ng/ml while the rest are above that level (the mean ferritin was 3,339.6 μg/l). The mean 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
357 
haemoglobin level was 8.35 (SD 0.95) while 42% of subjects had a haemoglobin level of 9 gm%. 55.7%) claimed 
they were always compliant to chelation, while the rest claimed to be compliant sometimes. [73] MRI 
assessment of iron overload is still unavailable despite efforts. There is an increasing economic development 
which hopefully will assist in offering optimal care in the coming years. All treatment is offered free of charge 
since universal coverage is available.  
Ongoing prevention for many years is partially successful in reducing birth incidence hindered partly because 
of the difficulty of raising awareness and reaching remote islands. 
Myanmar: this is a country with a very low prevalence of β-thalassaemia, the overall carrier rate being only 
0.5% while HbE is 26%. Only one province, Kayin, reports a high β-thalassaemia carrier rate of 8.9% but the 
population is only 1.5 million compared to the 54 million of the whole country. The reported 4000 patients are 
mostly NTDT. According to a report from the Yangon Children Hospital, the levels of hemoglobin (Hb) appear 
to be very low and patient management poor [74].  Blood transfusion is provided free of charge since 2014. 
Since most (70%) of patients are NTDT, only 18% of patients in Yangon have a serum ferritin level >2000ng/dl. 
HCV positivity is 12.6%. However, universal coverage has not yet been applied, and so family contribution is 
necessary. 
Nepal: in this country both sickle cell genes and thalassaemia genes are frequent. Sickle cell is more 
concentrated towards western part of Nepal and especially in Tharu ethnic population. In contrast, the 
distribution of β-thalassemia is found throughout the country and among all ethnic groups of population [75]. 
Most known β-thalassemia patients are treated at the Children’s Hospital in Katmandu. The challenges in 
managing chronic conditions like beta-thalassemia in remote rural areas, where healthcare access and 
awareness are limited, mean that many patients are left untreated or seriously undertreated [76].  
All basic treatment is provided free by government funds. In a recent publication the medical charts of 54 
thalassemia major patients registered at the Civil Service Hospital were retrospectively analysed: The median 
age of the patients was 17 years (3–34 years); 71% of patients failed to maintain haemoglobin above 9.5 gm% 
primarily because of the unavailability of red blood cells; the mean serum ferritin was 4486.12 ng/mL (range 
469–9585 ng/mL). Overall, 80% [77] of patients reported interrupted use of iron-chelating agents because of 
frequent shortages of medicines; 93% of patients were found to have stunted growth; overall, 7.6% had cardiac 
complications, and 5.5% had hypothyroidism; 54.1% of females of reproductive age had primary amenorrhea. 
The average cost of thalassemia care was 70,000 NRS (∼533 USD) in paediatric patients and 250,000 NRS 
(∼1906 USD) in adult patients per annum. This includes the cost of blood transfusion, commute to the 
transfusion centre, and iron-chelating agents [77]. There is no prevention program and the fate of patients 
outside Katmandu is unknown. Much work has yet to be done in Nepal to improve the services but at least 
government interest has been aroused. Similar results are reported in a survey from a peripheral hospital [78]. 
The healthcare services of Nepal as well as the medical community have increased their interest in thalassaemia 
in recent years and if this continues progress towards reducing disease burden will also increase even though 
prevention is still at limited.  
Sri Lanka: The majority of patients have β-thalassemia and a minority (16%) HbE/ β-thalassemia. In one review 
61% of patients had low pretransfusion haemoglobin levels (< 9.0 g/dL) despite receiving high transfusion 
volumes (> 200 mL/kg/year) [79].  
Sri Lanka does not have a regular national registry, but in a recent report data was collected from most if not all 
treatment centres [80]; data on 1774 patients from 23 centers were collected. 1219 patients (68.7%) had 
homozygous β-thalassaemia, 360 patients (20.3%) had hemoglobin E β-thalassaemia, and 50 patients (2%) had 
sickle β-thalassaemia. Patients with thalassaemia major, with mean age of 13.2 (SD 7.6) years (range 5 
months—44years) were significantly younger than those with HbE β-thalassaemia [mean age 21.5 (SD 12.9) 
years, range 6 months to 60 years; p<0.0001]. This is a typically young, undertreated population of patients with 
a mean serum ferritin level of 2383.  
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
358 
According to a report from the patient support association in 2019, the government spends over Rs. 800,000/- 
(about 2400 USD) per child annually, “who will invariably die at a young age”. 
 
Figure 3. Survival Functions of Thalassaemia Patients in Sri Lanka by Disease Subtype (Hemals Thalassaemia Care 
Center, 2017) 
A sharp decline in survival after the age of 30yrs is seen especially in β-thalassaemia major. [81]]. The overall 
survival of patients of β-TM is still not on a par with that of the Mediterranean countries [82.]. In contrast median 
survival in HbE/ β-thalassaemia patients was 49 years [83].  
In Sri Lanka, the Ministry of Health started a thalassaemia screening programme for school children and young 
adults in 2005. The program is voluntary and based on the ‘Safe Marriages’ concept, so community awareness 
is of vital importance if birth incidence is too affected. One of the most fundamental issues with the thalassemia 
screening program is that it has operated without central control: individual hospitals conduct their own 
screening programs not collated by the Ministry of Health and annual births showed no clear reduction until 
2012 [84, 80]. Prenatal diagnosis is available but is a limited service confined to academic centres [85]. 
A cost of illness study was published in 2020, which discussed the cost of treating children (< 18 years) in 2017. 
The total annual direct hospital cost was $US 2092 per patient year. With added household costs were $US 206 
(total societal burden of $US 2807 per patient year). Despite support relatively low levels of household income 
resulted in about 1 in 4 households experiencing catastrophic costs (> 10% of total income). [86].  
Sri Lanka has a medical community and an infrastructure of services that could result in excellent outcomes. 
Poor central support to service development and quality as well as family support, does not help to achieve the 
standards that the country is capable of.   
 
Thailand: A country with constant development, which has recently moved to high HDI category.  It is 
characterised by a large, affected population by haemoglobinopathy patients with a very large majority being 
HbE/ β-thalassaemia. In addition, there is a high prevalence of alpha-thalassemia (20-30%) and variants like Hb 
Constant Spring (1-8%). The burden of disease in terms of patient numbers was summarized by Prof Suthat 
Fucharoen in 2019 during a SEATAF conference: 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
359 
Table 11. Estimated Burden of Haemoglobinopathy in Thailand: At-Risk Couples, Affected Births, and Living 
Patients (Prof. Suthat Fucharoen, SEATAF Conference, 2019) 
Conditions 
Couples at risk/year 
Affected births/year 
Living patients 
Homozygous β-thal 
828 
207 
2070 
HbE/ β-thal 
12852 
3213 
96390 
Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis 
3332 
833 
0 
HbH disease 
22400 
5600 
336000 
Total  
39412 
9853 
434460 
 
There is a long tradition of research and service development which have made Thailand a reference country 
for the whole SE Asia. Despite this case management is uneven across the country and so patient data variable. 
In a multi-centre study, including peripheral centres, conducted between 2015 and 2017, the mean hemoglobin 
level was 7.1 ± 1.3 g/dl in patients with TDT and 7.7 ± 1.2 g/dl in patients with NTDT. The mean serum ferritin was 
2,250 ± 2,313 ng/ml in patients with TDT, and 1,483 ± 1,530 ng/ml in patients with NTDT. The patients were 
selected to be over 18 years, and the mean ages were similar between the TDT and NTDT groups, 27.8 years vs. 
29 years. Examples of complications in this group include extramedullary hematopoiesis, detected in 12.5% of 
TDT patients and only 4.9% of NTDT patients, indicating possible undertransfusion [87]. In a more recent cohort 
from Chiang Mai, including 209 TM and 279 HbE/ β-thal patients, predominant causes of mortality were 
infection-related (36.9%) and cardiac complications (27.7%). The mean age of these patients was 13 years, and 
a main predictor of poor outcome was iron overload identified as serum ferritin >3000ng/ml, affecting 16.4% of 
this cohort [88]. Hospital admissions were also mainly due to iron overload with infections being the second 
cause [89] 
For patient care national guidelines have been prepared, based on TIF’s Guidelines for the Clinical Management 
of Thalassaemia, but modified to be a realistic reflection of local circumstances. 
The cost of treatment as estimated in 2010 [90] is as follows: 
• 
for ages 1-10 years –  2900 Euros/year 
• 
for ages 11-20 years – 5000 euros/year 
• 
for ages 21-30 years – 7230 euros/year 
The health system of Thailand is divided into three schemes, reaching all of the 68.4 million population (2018): 
• 
The Universal Coverage Scheme (USC), this is the largest scheme covering 48.8 million people. 
• 
Civil Servant Medical Benefit Scheme (CSMBS) covering 4.97 million people 
• 
The Social Security Scheme (SSS) covering 14.47 million people 
• 
Under these schemes all thalassaemia patients are supported for full treatment. Haematopoietic Stem 
Cell Transplantation (HSCT) is still out-of-pocket, with a projection for full support by 2020. 
The cost to manage patients with TDT, living 10 to 30 years, is approximately 39,393 to 20,000 USD/patient 
covering regular blood transfusions and iron chelation [91] . A cost-benefit analysis of an 8-year prevention 
programme in Chiang Mai province (north Thailand), involving 21975 pregnant women and their husbands and 
which resulted in the prevention of 80 affected births, cost 93,667 USD. This included screening and pre-natal 
diagnosis. For the same period the cost of treatment was 6,756,401USD. This means that the benefit vs cost is 
72:1. 
Both treatment and prevention are reimbursed under the universal coverage insurance scheme. Since 2002, 
Thailand’s entire population of 63 million has been entitled to a comprehensive health benefit package [92]. 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
360 
A national prevention program was initiated in 1997. This includes antenatal screening in the first trimester of 
pregnancy and the availability of prenatal diagnosis all free of charge [93]. Aborting the foetus with thalassemia 
diseases was not well-accepted. Other challenges affecting prevention include the fact that medical personnel 
do not inform about PND availability, laboratory errors are another preventable issue and approximately 50% 
of pregnant women attend ante-natal clinics late in pregnancy. However, this is a well-studied population with 
sensitised authorities and a reduced burden is expected.  
Timor Leste: little is known about thalassaemia in this country. It is assumed that it has the same pattern of 
disease as Indonesia of which it was once a province. However, there is no published information on services 
and TIF has no member associations in the country. 
Comments: This WHO region hosts one of the largest thalassaemia populations in the world. It consists of LMIC 
mainly countries, with large geographical areas and complex population structures with tribal groups, linguistic 
subgroups and a variety of religions and cultures. National programs are scarce and quality of care very variable, 
ranging from a few centres of excellence to many centres unable to meet the real needs of patients. Much work 
has to be done at national level which depends on raising awareness and advocacy both by professionals and 
support associations. This is an area where TIF activities should constant and almost daily.  
 
WHO West Pacific Region (WPR) 
Introduction 
The Western Pacific Region is home to almost 1.9 billion people across 37 countries and areas. Headquartered 
in Manila, Philippines. It includes countries big (such as China, with 1.4 billion people) and small (such as Niue, 
home to just 1000 people).  
There are 15 country offices across the Region: 11 WHO representative offices and 4 country liaison offices. 
Together with the Regional Office, the 15 country offices support 37 countries and areas. Of interest to TIF 
because of significant presence of thalassaemia: Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, 
Laos, Macao, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore and Vietnam. However, there are other 
member states with reported thalassaemia syndromes but no real data. From TIF database there are around 
4000 new births per year affected by beta thalassaemia syndromes and a minimum of 40000 living patients 
(excluding China)  
The region is characterised by unprecedented economic growth, while migration and urbanization in the region 
have created opportunities for better lives. 
 For health development training programmes and supporting the building of comprehensive local health 
services have been the main policies. While recognizing that communicable diseases remains a significant 
public health issue, the increased prevalence of noncommunicable diseases, coupled with ageing populations 
throughout the Region, means there needs to be a greater emphasis on preventive and health promotion 
activities, even as communicable diseases continued to require considerable resources. 
Three main priorities have emerged for the regional office as the issues reflecting the Western Pacific’s unique 
economic, social and environmental context:  
1. 
Health security, including antimicrobial resistance  
2. NCDs and ageing (mainly heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases, 
responsible for 86% of deaths in the Western Pacific Region) 
3. 
Climate change and the environment. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
361 
Projects and services promoted to address these issues: 
1. 
Communications for Health (C4H): On 20–21 April 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
Regional Office for the Western Pacific convened the Member States Consultation on the Draft 
Regional Action Framework on Communication for Health (C4H). C4H is a tool for health to help 
Individuals, health workers, policymakers and government leaders make decisions every day that 
affect people’s health. Evidence-based, strategic communications – that is, using communication 
principles and processes to target a particular audience for a specific purpose, based on known 
audience needs and preferences for tackling complex health challenges. Whether it be promoting 
health-protective behaviours, increasing vaccination rates, reducing stigma around mental health, or 
advocating for inclusive health policies, strategic communication can play an important role. 
Communication is, in itself, a public health intervention: it is a technical field backed by theory and 
evidence {can we get them to add thalassaemia awareness?} 
2. Behavioural and social sciences for better health: investigating the cognitive, social, and 
environmental drivers and barriers that influence health-related behaviours. Applying behavioural and 
social sciences requires a multidisciplinary approach and the adoption of theory, methods, research, 
practical tools and techniques drawn from psychology, sociology, anthropology, communications, 
marketing, economics, systems thinking and design thinking, among others. Behavioural and social 
sciences evidence can contribute to and complement other public health efforts that focus on the non-
medical factors that influence health outcomes. WHO includes behavioural and social sciences in its 
work in different ways and across a variety of issues. 
3. 
Essential Medicines and Health Technologies: The Essential Medicines and Health Technologies (EMT) 
unit supports Member States to improve access to essential, high-quality, safe, effective and 
affordable medicines and health products. 
4. Health Policy and Financing: The Health Policy and Financing (HPF) unit provides technical assistance 
to Member States to develop robust health financing systems across the core functions of revenue 
collection, pooling and purchasing. HPF also supports countries to develop coherent and realistic 
health legislation, policies, strategies and plans, with strong links between national and operational 
levels, and to monitor their implementation. 
5. Equity and Social Determinants: The Equity and Social Determinants (ESD) unit collaborates with 
Member States and other stakeholder groups to advance the Sustainable Development Goals by 
addressing the underlying social determinants of health. ESD supports countries to develop and 
implement health policies and programmes that enhance health equity, integrate pro-poor, gender-
responsive, and human rights-based approaches. WHO Western Pacific Regional Office supports 
Member States in developing and implementing their national health policies, strategies and plans by: 
• 
Engaging in technical collaboration to build national capacity for equity-focused policy and programme 
design, data collection and analysis, and multisectoral and multistakeholder collaboration. 
• 
Fostering country-led regional peer learning and cooperation. 
6. Noncommunicable Diseases: Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), principally cardiovascular diseases, 
cancer, diabetes and chronic respiratory diseases, are the leading causes of death and disability in the 
Western Pacific Region. The WHO Western Pacific Region NCD and health promotion programme 
supports Member States to implement global and regional actions plans to prevent and control NCDs 
by: 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
362 
• 
Raising the priority accorded to NCDs through international cooperation and advocacy 
• 
Strengthening national capacity to accelerate country responses 
• 
Reducing modifiable risk factors through the creation of health-promoting environments 
• 
Strengthening health systems to address prevention and control of NCDs through people-centred primary 
health care and universal health coverage 
• 
Promoting national capacity for high-quality research and development; and 
• 
Monitoring trends, determinants and progress to achieve global, regional and national targets through 
evidence-based interventions. 
7. 
The Health Information and Intelligence (HII) unit: supports Member States to strengthen health 
information systems, promote the adoption and scale-up of digital health and the utilization of 
integrated health information for decision-making. 
8. The Innovation and Research (INR) unit: aims to define WHO’s meaningful contribution to better 
leverage innovation for health. This is accomplished by taking the process of iterative development 
from the stimulation and identification of innovation to its adaptation and scale-up, including financial, 
systems, technological and social innovation. Public health innovation refers to the development of a 
new process, policy, product or program that increase quality, impact and efficiency. Going beyond 
mere ideation and piloting, to implementation at national level. 
9. The Universal Health Coverage (UHC) unit: supports Member States' efforts to transform health 
systems on their UHC journey with tailored strategies informed by new ways of working, best 
practices, tools and strategic direction. This is accomplished by: 
• 
Convening the Technical Advisory Group on Universal Health Coverage in the Western Pacific Region (UHC 
TAG) and providing technical support 
• 
Identifying areas of synergies with UHC for possible collaborative efforts through the Technical Advisory 
Group Alliance, a coordination mechanism engaging all TAGs in the Western Pacific Region to collectively 
work towards achieving the For the Future vision 
• 
Sharing best practices and knowledge to advance UHC with health system transformation in countries. 
• 
These policies and strategies promoted by the regional office can be tools for the development of 
thalassaemia services since the burden of thalassaemia is high in this region. 
Table 12. Socio-economic development 
Country  
HDI rank 
WB rank 
HE/cap   WB 
data 
HE/%GDP 
WB data 
UHC index 
Australia 
0.951 
High  
5901.11 
10.56 
87 
Brunei  
0.829 
High 
650.48 
2.39 
78 
Cambodia 
0.593 
LMIC 
115.76 
7.51 
58 
China 
0.768 
UMIC 
583.43 
5.59 
81 
Hong Kong 
0.952 
High 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Laos 
0.607 
LMIC 
68.29 
2.69 
52 
Malaysia 
0.803 
UMIC 
418.66 
4.12 
76 
Papua New 
Guinea 
0.558 
LMIC 
63.93 
2.53 
30 
Philippines 
0.699 
LMIC 
193.79 
5.61 
58 
Singapore 
0.939 
High 
3537.0 
6.05 
89 
Vietnam 
0.703 
LMIC 
166.23 
4.68 
68 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
363 
The countries of this region vary from the richest to the poorest. This is reflected in the health expenditure 
which varies from 6000 USD TO 60 USD. Some countries even those in the LMIC category are making an effort 
to improve by devoting a higher percentage of the GDP to health while a few countries do not seem to be 
addressing the health needs of their population. Universal health coverage seems to be characteristic of the 
wealthy countries, demonstrated by the fact that Low HDI countries also have the lowest UHC Index. It can be 
predicted that quality of services will suffer in these same settings.  
Hong Kong is a special administrative region in China with a much higher HDI level than mainland China. We 
will deal with it as a separate entity even though politically it is part of PRC. The population of 7.4 million benefits 
from a more advance healthcare system with different outcomes. Likewise, Taiwan, a country of 23 million is 
not recognised as an independent country and so is not listed in any WHO region. However, it has a high 
economic development and the HDI is estimated at 0.93 in 2023. A national health insurance system was 
introduced in Taiwan in 1995, mandatory for all citizens. Health expenditures is 6.4% of GDP. As for Hong Kong 
we will refer to Taiwan separately since both are high prevalence countries which have developed services for 
thalassaemia. 
Table 13. Overall health status in the region 
Country  
IMR/1000 
livebirths 
Under 5 
mortality/1000 
livebirths 
Life expectancy 
Healthy life 
expectancy at 
birth 
Australia 
2.96 
3.7 
83.73 
70.19 
Brunei  
10.26 
11.5 
74.54 
65.6 
Cambodia 
21 
25.7 
71.46 
61.5 
China 
5 
7.3 
78.79 
68.5 
Hong Kong 
1.17 
1.97 
85.83 
NA 
Laos 
34 
44.1       
69.27 
60.5 
Malaysia 
6.49 
8.6 
76.42 
65.7 
Papua New Guinea 
32.81 
43.9 
66.12 
57.1 
Philippines 
22.14 
26.4 
72.3 
62.0 
Singapore 
1.54 
2.2 
84.27 
73.6 
Vietnam 
14.42 
20.9 
74.74 
65.3 
Taiwan 
3.9 
4.1 
79.84 
NA 
 
These basic health indicators are related to HDI and wealth of the countries. The same is true of the various 
services. 
 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
364 
Table 14. Available services 
Country  
Doctors/1000 
population 
Nurses/1000 
population 
MRI density per 
million 
VNRD as % of 
total donations 
National 
haemovigilance 
program 
Australia 
4.1 
13.1 
14.71 
100 
yes 
Brunei  
1.61 
5.9 
2.39 
100 
No 
Cambodia 
0.2 
1.0 
0.07 
100 
no 
China 
2.2 
3.1 
NA 
Almost 100 
no 
Hong Kong 
1.3 
8.2 
NA 
100 shortages 
yes 
Laos 
0.4 
1.2 
0 
70 
no 
Malaysia 
2.3 
3.5 
2.89 
99.9 
 
Papua New Guinea 
0.1 
0.5 
0 
NA 
no 
Philippines 
0.8 
5.4 
0.3 
41% 
no 
Singapore 
2.5 
6.2 
7.76 
100 
yes 
Vietnam 
0.8 
1.4 
NA 
40% of needs 
no 
Taiwan 
1.6 
4.6 
NA 
100 
yes 
• 
Manpower is an important contributor to quality of health services. If the general manpower in doctors 
and nurses is insufficient for the whole service, then it is probable that thalassaemia clinics will not 
have adequate staffing. In this region Cambodia, Laos, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and 
Vietnam having less than one doctor per 1000 of the population. The same countries with the 
exception of the Philippines are lacking in nurses.  
• 
The possibility of MRI measurements of iron in heart and liver seems possible only in Australia, Brunei, 
Malaysia and Singapore. Very large patient populations of this region cannot benefit.  
• 
Adequacy and safety of blood are also deficient with the exception of the 4 countries with the least 
number of patients (Australia, Hong Kong Singapore and Taiwan). To make matters worse, many 
patients have to pay for blood since many countries do support all patients with universal coverage; In 
a report from southern China patients need to pay 260.6$/ month for blood while the monthly family 
income is 198.5$ (x1.3 more than the monthly income) to which serious shortages in donated blood 
must also be added. This adds to the burden of disease and takes away wellbeing quality of life and 
survival. [ Chen S, Liu Y, Yin X, Lu Q, Du X, Huang R, Jia Y, Wang X, Xi X. Transfusion burden and 
willingness to pay for temporary alleviation of anemia status in transfusion-dependent beta-
thalassemia patients in China. BMC Health Serv Res. 2024 Oct 10;24(1):1215. doi: 10.1186/s12913-024-
11547-2] 
Country 
β-thal 
carriers 
HbE 
carriers 
Expected β-thal 
patient births/1000 
Expected HbE/β-
thal births/1000 
Known   β-thal 
patients 
Known HbE/ β-
thal patients 
Australia  
0.4 
0.4 
0.004 
0.008 
332 
• 
 
Brunei 
2 
3.7 
0.1 
0.37 
179 
• 
 
Cambodia 
0.2 
34.4 
0.001 
3.44 
 
• 
 
China 
0.66% 
• 
 
0.334 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
 
Hong Kong 
3.05 
0.33 
0.233 
0.05 
382 
• 
 
Laos 
2.6 
30 
0.169 
3.9 
275 
• 
 
Malaysia 
2.9 
2.6 
0.21 
0.377 
4906 
3861 
Papua New 
Guinea 
5 
NA 
0.625 
NA 
• 
 
• 
 
Philippines 
1.2 
0.4 
0.036 
0.024 
600 
• 
 
Singapore 
1.6 
1.7 
0.064 
0.136 
258 
• 
 
Vietnam 
1.63 
3.5 
0.066 
0.285 
20000 
• 
 
Taiwan 
1.1 
• 
 
• 
 
• 
 
454 
• 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
365 
 
• 
In this table the number of patients represents only the last reported numbers reported to TIF by local 
collaborators and can only be an approximation. Apart from Vietnam and Malaysia most countries of 
the region report small numbers. However China is expected to have a large affected population but 
because of a lack of registry and each region having a separate policy, even an approximation is not 
possible; based on carrier frequency of β-thalassaemia in the southern provinces the expected affected 
births are around 2000 (1966) – this could mean almost 30000 patient living up to the age of 15 years, 
without considering HbE (low frequency) and alpha thalassaemia (high frequency). 
• 
In the reported patient numbers, the total given does not differentiate TDT and NTDT except in 
Malaysia which maintains a national registry. 
 
Country summaries 
Australia: this is a country of immigrants in which about 12% of the population has ancestors from thalassaemia 
prevalent countries. The number of known patients is over 300 but since there is no national registry this may 
be a minimal number. Australia is a high-ranking economy and in medical services it is characterized by a very 
strong infrastructure and an active contribution to medical research. In this research thalassaemia is well 
represented. The level of clinical care for thalassaemia may be regarded as being on par with European 
reference centres and so outcomes can be a measure of comparison with the other countries. In one study of 
iron loading and its control, it was found that mean serum ferritin in TDT patients was 1686ng/ml and 1230 in 
NTDT patients with only 10% exhibiting cardiac sideroris by MRI T2* measurements; on the other hand, hepatic 
iron load was high (LIC by R2 Ferriscan) in 48% of all thalassaemia patients and 33% of TDT patients [94]. This 
experience indicates chelation practices which are indicative of reference centre outcomes in most countries. 
In a more recent survey of adult women with TDT and age range from 18 years to over 50 years, 63.3% had a 
serum Ferritin<1,000 ng/ml and the complication rate was similar to that of western countries reference 
centres; Hypogonadism 33.3%, Diabetes mellitus 15.0%, Hypothyroidism 21.7% etc. [95]. For prevention carrier 
screening tests are available and free with a referral from many GP clinics, screening is voluntary, but it is not 
certain that community understanding is enough to bring most couples to the counselling clinic. Prenatal 
diagnosis and preimplantation genetic testing are available.  
In summary the burden of disease is reduced by good clinical services but there is a question whether birth 
incidence is affected by the current level of preventive services. 
Brunei Darussalam: a Sultanate of 452,524 (2023 est) people located on the island of Borneo. Most of the 
population is of Maly origin with some indigenous people and a Chinese minority. It is an oil rich country with a 
booming economy. Thalassaemia and HbE are carried by about 5-6% of the population and 200 patients are 
reported to be under treatment [96].  Of these patients 55 are on regular transfusions according to a newspaper 
report from the main treatment hospital (Women and Children Centre of Raja Isteri Pengiran Anak Saleha 
(RIPAS) Hospital). Concerning the level of care and the outcomes of patients little is known because of no 
published data and also there is no patient association linked to TIF. Voluntary screening is available and 
awareness promoting events organized by the Women and Children services take place annually.  
Cambodia: in this country β-thalassaemia is carried by only 0.2% of the population; however, HbE is carried by 
34.4% so that thalassaemia syndromes are frequent, with about 130 new cases per year. There are large regional 
differences in the frequency of thalassaemia genes; for example, in one region (Preah Vihear) the carrier rate of 
HbE is 55.9%. In addition, there is a prevalence of non-deletional as well as deletional alpha thalassaemia. [97]. 
A large proportion of these patients are likely to have NTDT, but severity is expected to be variable and 
morbidity to increase with age. Packed red cells (PRCs) are available at most referral hospitals (provincial 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
366 
hospitals). Oral iron chelators [deferiprone (DFP) and deferasirox (DFX)] are only available from a private 
pharmaceutical company [98]. In the National Pediatric Hospital, Phnom Penh, there are about 450 children 
registered as hemoglobinopathy (2018) of which 150 are severe cases (115 β- Thal, 45 α- Thal/HbH disease). A 
National guideline for the Clinical Management of Patients with Thalassemia in Cambodia has been developed 
and published by Ministry of Health in 2011. This is not generally known or practiced outside the National 
Pediatric Hospital. Oral Deferiprone (GPO-L1, product of Thailand) is available in the private pharmacies, and 
so it is of very limited use. It is not on the list of essential medicine of the Ministry of Health. The other chelating 
agents are not available in the country (information from Dr Try Lytheang, Department of Paediatric Hemato – 
Immunology, National Paediatric Hospital, Phnom Penh 2019). These facts and the absence of health insurance 
coverage means that the majority of patients do not benefit from adequate medical care and so disease burden 
is expected to increase with age and early death is a common outcome. 
China: this is a country with a huge population (estimated in 2023 to be 1,425,671,352 people) and a large 
geographical territory. Thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders are highly prevalent only in the 
territories south of the Yangtze River. Migration flows are expected to carry the genes to the northern territories 
but there are currently no data as to the extent of epidemiological change. The nationwide prevalence of β-
thalassaemia is 0.66% in mainland China [99]. Current knowledge of epidemiology is summarised in the table 
below: 
 
Table 15. Epidemiology of thalassaemia and haemoglobin disorders in Southern China 
 
Fujian 
Guangxi 
Guangdong 
Guizhou 
Hainan 
Hong 
Kong 
Sichuan 
Yunnan 
α thal 
carriers 
3.17% 
14.95% 
8.53% 
9.76% 
12.69% 
5% 
1.66% 
? 
β thal 
carriers 
1.32% 
6.78% 
4.53% 
4.9% 
2.09% 
3.05% 
3.2% 
3.7% 
HbE 
carriers 
0 
0.42% 
0.1% 
0 
0 
0.33% 
0 
1.6 
Expected β 
thal/1000 
0.044 
1.15 
0.513 
0.03 
0.109 
0.233 
0.256 
0.342 
Expected β 
/HbE/1000 
0 
0.142 
0.023 
0 
0 
0.05 
0 
0.296 
Total β thal 
births 
18 
803 
552 
17 
132 
16 
202 
224 
Total β 
/HbE births 
0 
99 
24 
0 
0 
3 
0 
194 
Total α thal 
hydrops 
18-20 
902 
182 
17 
13 
19 
1-2 
94 
 
In these 8 provinces almost 2000 new patients are added every year who are homozygote β- thalassaemia to 
which are added 320 with HbE/ β-thalassaemia. The births of significant syndromes of α-thalassaemia are not 
known but since non-deletional forms exist the burden of disease increases even more. In addition, there are 
expected to be several thousand cases of hydrops fetalis in these provinces (3,325 was reported as the annual 
incidence in Guangxi). To this burden the relatively rare cases of thalassaemia found in the northern provinces 
must also be added. The contribution of northern Chinese populations may be greater than expected since in a 
recent study of 974 pregnant women in the north around 3% were diagnosed as β- thalassaemia carriers [100]. 
The total number of living patients across China is not known, but a recent publication estimates that about 
300,000 people in China have thalassaemia major or intermedia requiring medical intervention, even though 
15000 are currently being treated [101].  
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
367 
The level of care is variable since there are centres of excellence mainly in university hospitals, but poor care is 
witnessed (from TIF visits) in rural and small urban settings. In a report to TIF from the China Thalassemia 
Association 2011, it was stated that Thalassemia patients are facing poverty, discrimination, employment and 
insurance problems. Inequalities were found to be associated with low education, and residence. Progress is of 
course ongoing and there is now nation-wide availability of partial or full insurance for prenatal genetic testing, 
RBC-transfusions, iron-chelating drugs and haematopoietic cell transplants, even though regional differences 
remain. Even so more than half of patients do not receive needed transfusions because of supply shortages 
[101]. There is also need for improvement in the prevention practices  
The undiscounted lifetime direct medical cost for a patient with β-thalassaemia major was estimated to be 
$518,871 (95% CI: $293,524-$744,217), 75.6% of which was due to the cost of iron chelation therapy; the annual 
direct medical cost, direct non-medical cost, and indirect cost per adult patient with β-thalassaemia major at 
56 kg were $13,478, $2,542, and $4,000, respectively [102]. The gross national income per capita in China is 
forecast to amount to €11.87k in 2023.  
These facts indicate that the burden of disease is still high both in economic terms and in medical outcomes. 
Hong Kong is a special case with a much highly developed economy (the GDP per capita in Hong Kong is 
expected to reach 44931.00 USD by the end of 2023) and more organized and uniform health services (e.g. IMR 
<2/1000). The 350-400 patients under treatment are expected to have better outcomes even though recent data 
are not available.  
Prevention programs exist now in all the high prevalence provinces but are most organized in Guangxi and 
Guangdong. Premarital screening and prenatal diagnosis (PND) for the prevention of thalassaemic foetuses are 
available [103]. In these provinces significant reduction of birth incidence has been achieved.  
Laos: a country of 7.5 million in which HbE is the predominant variant with much less β- thalassaemia. The 
predominant clinical syndrome is expected to be NTDT. Health services are generally ‘poor’ in this low resource 
country as evidenced by a high IMR and under-5 mortality. This is reflected in thalassaemia services in which 
patient care is indeed limited: treatment is only available in the capital city of Vientiane. The level of blood 
transfusion seems adequate and bedside filtration of packed red cells is offered. However, for iron chelation 
Deferiprone only is offered. Patient care is suboptimal on this evidence. Prevention has started and there is a 
screening service in Laos which consists of Premarital screening (Opportunistic), Preconception screening 
(Opportunistic) and Antenatal Screening which is mandatory. According to the National Strategy of Maternal 
and Child Health, screening for thalassaemia along with anaemia in general, is included in the list for obstetric 
services to follow. The intention is to reach ANC attendance 100% by 2025 (at present 60% coverage only). 
There is a laboratory screening algorithm for ante-natal clinic screening. Amniocentesis is available in the 
capital Vientiane, along with a guideline for safe termination of pregnancy. Molecular diagnosis is available in 
the capital. In the provinces however, there is limitation of human resources [unpublished information from Dr. 
Alongkone Phengsavanh, Dept of OBGYN, and Dr. Sourideth Sengchanh, Dept of Paediatrics, University of 
Health Sciences 2019} [104]].  
Malaysia: Malaysia has maintained a thalassaemia patient register for many years. The most recent report is 
published in 2020 [105], on 8681 patients. The majority of the patients were in the group of 5.0–24.9 years of 
age (5146/7984 patients, 64.45%), and the largest number of patients were aged between 10.0 and 14.9 years 
(1394, 17.46%). However, this large cohort includes a spectrum of severity, including HbE/β- thalassaemia, 
thalassaemia major, intermedia and HbH disease. For thalassaemia major the peak age group is 10.0–14.9 years 
(Fig.). For HbE/β-thalassaemia, the peak age group is 15-20 years. As seen in the age distribution curve, this is 
a young patient population. This is an indication that much improvement is required across the treatment 
centres in Malaysia to improve outcomes by conventional treatment, which is also evidenced by the distribution 
of patients according to the level of ferritin. 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
368 
 
Figure 4. Age Distribution of Thalassaemia Patients in Malaysia 
 
In economic terms the lifetime cost for a TDT patient has been calculated to be US$ 561,208, with chelation 
cost accounting for 56.9 % of the total cost followed by blood transfusion cost, 13.1%. including the family 
healthcare expenditure, then lifetime cost is estimated to be 606,665 USD. [106]. The survival probability at 45 
years of age, has risen from 65% in 2007 to 85% in 2017. Public universal healthcare is accessible to all legal 
residents of Malaysia, funded by the government, to provide low-cost universal and comprehensive services.  
In assessing burden of thalassaemia, it essential to review results from provinces where many patients are 
treated. In a 2024 report from Sarawak, patients aged 10 years and above (median 21 years), 34.8% patients 
had mean serum ferritin 2500ng/ml and above, and 66.6% had liver iron concentration (LIC) ≥7mg/g. These are 
indications that burden of disease will increase rather than decrease over time [107].  
As in many countries issues such as adherence and psychosocial support must also be considered if improved 
outcomes and a reduced morbidity burden is to be expected. In a recent study amongst adolescents with TDT 
only 51.4% had good adherence [108].  
In a 2023 TIF patient’ survey on service quality 10 responses were received all in the Malay language, 
representing 0.125% of the total Malay patient population. The average age of this group was 31.7 years (range 
21-48); this may indicate an adult or at least a growing, as opposed to a child population. Only 3 patients are 
employed full time, while 5 are looking for work; this may reflect employer prejudice towards chronic disease. 
5 patients had less than high school education, with 3 having completed secondary and 2 tertiary educations. 7 
patients are single and 3 married. Pre-transfusion Hb is below 9g/dl in 9/10 patients, a fact which must be 
confirmed since this is below guidelines. Chelating agents are available, with no interruptions in supply. Ferritin 
levels are measured every 3 months in only half of the respondents while the other half are tested every 6 
months. 2 patients did not know their ferritin level while 3 were below 1000ng/ml, and 3 >4000ng/ml. Cardiac 
T2* is measured annually in 9/10 patients but measurements are far below the performance experienced in 
reference countries: only 2/10 have T2* >20ms while 3 patients did not answer (presumably are not aware of 
their result). Liver iron is measured by MRI in 9/10 patients, while one did not respond. 2 patients reported LIC 
<7 mg/kg dw while 3 did not know their result. Despite universal health coverage 3 patient stated that they pay 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
369 
for blood transfusion! Concerning the offer of multidisciplinary care none of the patients responded to the 
question. This is a very small sample of the total patient population, but the indications are of a service that is 
still in need of improvement along with increasing knowledge and community awareness.   
In November 2016 the prevention policy was reviewed by launching a nationwide screening of 16-year-old 
students complemented by a cascade screening of high-risk families. The reduction in birth incidence has not 
been significant so far partly because only about 28% of at-risk couples accept both prenatal testing and 
pregnancy termination [information from Dr Mohammed Hishamshah 2018], but also knowledge of 
thalassaemia among unmarried individuals is found to be low [109]. 
Papua New Guinea: little is known about this country and TIF has only been able to communicate with one 
doctor and one parent. The north coastal region of the country is where malaria is hyperendemic and where 
most thalassaemia genes are found. In a 2006 study it was found that the frequency of the alpha thalassaemia 
genotype in pregnant mothers was 0.61[110].  
In a study of 21 patients and their families in 2021, they were transfused at very low Hb levels, and “no child was 
receiving chelating agents, and most had clinical evidence of iron overload. There were important impacts of 
thalassemia on quality of life, including very poor school attendance and some aspects of children's self-
perception. Families faced significant burdens and made genuine sacrifices to care for their children”.[111]. In 
fact, this report is referring to just blood transfusion and no other attempt to treat a situation reminiscent of 
the 1960s in most countries. If an old study is found to be true, then 5% of the population of this country could 
be carriers of beta thalassaemia, then almost 100 new affected children can be expected to be born every year. 
If this is also true, then most will be dying without a diagnosis during childhood.  
Philippines: Limited population studies of Filipinos in Hawaii and Taiwan found gene carrier frequencies of 9.1% 
and 6.8%, respectively [112, 113]. Another Taiwan study showed a showed a showed a β-thalassaemia carrier 
frequency of 0.9% in Filipinos [114]. This confirms Mutolsky’s findings of the 1960s [115].  
Haemoglobin disorders are now included in the national newborn screening program [116]. The alpha 
thalassaemia syndromes especially HbH disease are predominant, while β-thalassaemia is rare. 
Being a rare disease in a low resource country means that it has not been given priority in health policy. Inclusion 
in the NBS program is one step taken as is the creation of a national registry, which however has never been 
completed: in 2019 60 β-Thalassaemia cases and HbE/beta thalassaemia 15 cases. Knowledge concerning 
thalassaemia is very limited among health professionals, according to a report from Dr Maria Liza T. Naranjo, 
M.D, National Children’s Hospital, Manila, in 2019 (SEATHAF meeting. There is a health insurance system 
(PHILHEALTH), which covers blood transfusion (USD 52.33 per day) as outpatient care, maximum of 22 days/ 
year and hospital admissions (USD 133.00), maximum of 44 days/ year. Iron chelation is not supported but this 
is in the pipeline. Blood donation is 41% from volunteers, 44% from replacement donations (usually by family 
members, and 15% from paid donors. Pre-transfusion Hb can fall to 3-4g/dl (at accost of 28-105 USD) in many 
parts of the country. Leukodepleted, packed red cells are not always available, and the cost rises to 34-166 USD. 
There is no NAT testing. Monitoring of iron overload is by serum ferritin and MRI T2* (private) at a cost of USD 
285.71. All three iron chelating agents are available in the country but totally at the patient’s expense (Dr Marites 
B. Estrella 2019). Many patients still die at 9-15 years, although there are many survivors up to around 30 years. 
With these facts disease burden is made high by the lack of support to families, increasing complications and 
premature death.[117].  
Singapore: in contrast to its neighbours Singapore is a very high-income country with developed health 
services and adequate insurance coverage for its citizens. The population (5.92 million est for 2023) is multi-
ethnic, but the Chinese is the predominant element (76%), with Malays 15.4%, Indians making up 7.4%. In a 
molecular study of cord blood specimens, the carrier frequency for alpha-thalassemia mutations was about 
6.4% in the Chinese, 4.8% in Malays, and 5.2% in Indians. Only alpha deletions were observed in the Chinese. 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
370 
The carrier frequency for beta-thalassemia mutations was 2.7% in the Chinese, 6.3% in Malays, and 0.7% in 
Indians [118.]. There is a significant patient population which is offered treatment according to guidelines. 
However, results according to a recent report indicate that iron chelation could be better: liver iron loading was 
the most common transfusion-related complication and occurred in 79% of patients. Cardiac iron loading (T2* 
Technology is available at a cost of US$270) was noted in 28.3% and endocrine complications were present in 
34.2%. Liver iron loading was significantly associated with higher mean ferritin level. The cohort of older 
thalassaemia patients aged 31-50 experienced significantly higher rates of cardiac iron loading, endocrine 
complications and lower TranQOL scores compared to younger age cohorts. [119] 
A National Program for Thalassaemia Screening was initiated in 1992, at the KK Women’s and Children’s 
Hospital. This programme registers all thalassaemia carriers, provides free counselling and subsidized screening 
of 15USD (spouse & first-degree relatives). In this programme the pick- up rate is 4.5% for all carriers: this is 
broken down to 0.9% beta thalassaemia, 3% alpha thalassaemia, and 0.55% HbE carriers. Genetic counselling 
is provided to at-risk couples with informed choice for prenatal diagnosis. [Information unpublished from Law 
Hai Yang, Deputy Director National Thalassaemia Registry, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital 2018] 
Patient numbers are: Beta thalassaemia major 102 (64 Chinese), Intermedia 17 (14 Chinese), HbE/beta 
thalassaemia 139 (98 Malays), HbH Disease 699 (582 Chinese), other haemoglobinopathies 477 (272 Chinese).  
Vietnam: α-Thalassemia is particularly prevalent in Vietnam, with a reported prevalence rate of 51.5%. Carriers 
of β-thalassaemia are overall only 1.63% and HbE 3.5%. A newer study of 10112 of first-time pregnant women 
and their husbands, indicates alpha thalassemia is 10.73%, the carrier rate of beta thalassemia is 2.24%, and 
0.29% (29 patients) of patients carry both alpha thalassemia and beta-thalassemia gene mutations [120]. The 
different findings may be due to regional differences. In a similar study from south Vietnam (Ho Chi Minh City), 
7.82% carriers of α-thalassemia (α-thal), 5.31% carriers of β-thalassemia (β-thal), and 0.63% concurrent α-/β-
thal carriers were found, the differences again may be regional [121]. Also, from South Vietnam 6.2% of women 
were found to be carriers of β-thalassemia [122]. 
Patient numbers are not known but local experts estimate about 20000 with clinically significant syndromes 
(from discussions with doctors at the National Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion NIHBT, Hanoi). 
These patients are from different ethnic communities and geographical regions of the country; the majority are 
those of the Kinh ethnicity but there are also 54 other ethnic or tribal groups. [123]. The disease is present in all 
regions of Vietnam but is more prevalent among mountainous ethnic minorities. The level of care varies 
considerably but is regarded as improved in the main urban centres of Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. Low pre-
transfusion haemoglobin level (62.1 ± 1.7 g/dl) has been reported in the past and is still the reality in some 
regions, with some patients not chelated [124]. A study of 288 health-insured paediatric patients (mean age 
of10.4 (±11.3) years), found that the average annual economic burden of Thalassemia treatment was 
approximately USD 426.7(±294.0), in a region in which the average income was 158.7 USD/month. The 
treatment was costly for low-income patients as it cost nearly a quarter of an adult’s annual income in the 
region. Health coverage is not complete (UHC index 68) and so out of pocket expenses are required. This 
reduces the possibility of optimal care considerably and so increases the burden of disease in terms of increased 
morbidity and mortality [125].  
Of the patients treated at the NIHBT, 16.6% are under the age of 6 years, 27.4% 6-15 years, 27.7% 16-30 years 
and 28.3% are over the age of 30 years. 49.1% have HbE/thalassaemia, 27.7% beta thalassaemia, 16.1% HbH 
disease and 7.2% HbH Hb Constant Spring. Health insurance reimburses 100%, 95% or 80% of diagnosis and 
treatment, while the country is moving toward the implementation of universal health coverage. Blood 
donation is voluntary unpaid (100%). DFO is provided only for in-patients and DFP and DFX for outpatients. 
[presented by Dr Ha Nguyen Thi Thu, of the NIHBT thalassaemia clinic SEATHAF 2018]. 
To prevent thalassemia, in 2021, the Prime Minister approved the National Target Programme, part of which is 
the prevention of thalassemia in ethnic minority and mountainous areas. The objective is to reduce the number 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
371 
of children born with thalassemia and gradually improve the quality of life of children born with thalassemia. 
This is achieved through screening and counselling aa part of the pre-marital health check but also screening 
women in pregnancy. [https://baonghean.vn/phong-chong-benh-tan-mau-bam-sinh-tai-vung-dong-bao-dan-
toc-thieu-so-va-mien-nui-post260634.html]. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) and (PGD) are offered in collaboration 
with the obstetric hospitals in Hanoi. 
The picture is of fairly rapid development in this large country and hope for the coming years.  
Taiwan: this is a high income, high HDI country with a high prevalence of thalassaemia syndromes. It has a 
single-payer National Health Insurance Program since 1995. There is a registry for catastrophic illness database 
which includes patients who suffer from major diseases and are granted exemption from co-payment. 
In Taiwan, patients with TM primarily are treated with RBC transfusion and iron chelation, including leukocyte-
depleted RBCs to maintain pretransfusion haemoglobin level greater than 10 g/dl. Iron chelation therapy 
includes DFO, oral deferiprone and oral deferasirox, tailored to individual needs. In a study of 2011, the median 
age of TDT patients was 17.2 years (range, 0.1–48.0 years), with 58.1% patients being younger than 20 years 
and 41.9% older than 20 years. The mortality rate fell from 2.9% in 2007 to 0.7% in 2011. The complication rates 
have a rate and pattern similar to those of reference countries [126]. In a more recent study of 2984 patients 
with beta-thalassemia, the mean (SD) age was 37.8 (23.7) years, which again is indicative of survival analogous 
to that of reference countries [127].  
A National Thalassemia Major Prevention Program has been in place since 1993. A study conducted in 2012 
indicated a 91% reduction in the incidence of thalassemia major compared to the period between 1986 and 
1995 in Southern Taiwan. Consideration must be given to the impact of interracial marriage, since global 
migration and international marriage has affected the distribution of hemoglobinopathies in Taiwan. A more 
comprehensive prenatal screening for new immigrants with a longer follow-up is warranted. [128]. 
As far as disease burden goes, Taiwan appears to report results analogous to reference countries such as Italy.  
 
Comments 
As in other WHO regions, the thalassaemias take second place in the interest expressed by governments and 
even the regional office. The relation between quality of service remains a function of healthy economy and 
prevalence rate. Middle level economies with high prevalence, including Malaysia and China are promoting 
policies which are expected to give results in the near future while other countries have yet to adopt such 
policies or offer needed support to families and patients.   
. 
WHO European region (EUR) 
The countries of this region can be divided into those in which the haemoglobinopathy genes are prevalent in 
the indigenous populations (mainly the Mediterranean coast) and into those where these genes are rare but are 
being introduced by migration flows in the recent decades.  
• 
Countries with a carrier rate for β-thalassaemia, >2%: Albania, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Cyprus, North 
Macedonia, Greece, Italy, Malta, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uzbekistan 
• 
Countries with a carrier rate for β-thalassaemia 1-1.99%: Armenia, Bosnia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Montenegro, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Spain, Turkmenistan 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
372 
• 
Countries with a carrier rate for β-thalassaemia <1% in the indigenous population: Austria, Belgium, 
Croatia, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Russian Federation, Sweden, Switzerland, 
United Kingdom 
 
Table 16. High prevalence countries 
Country  
% β-thal 
carriers 
% HbS 
carriers 
Expected β-
thal patient 
births/1000 
Expected 
SCD 
births/1000 
Known/est 
β-thal 
patients  
Known/est 
SCD 
patients 
Albania 
5.0 
1.4 
0.625 
0.399 
356 
174 
Azerbaijan 
3.71 
0.8 
0.344 
0.164 
1350 
200 
Bulgaria 
2.5 
0 
0.156 
0 
270 
0 
Cyprus 
14 
0.27 
4.9 
0.191 
659 
56 
North Macedonia 
2.6 
0 
0.169 
0 
25 
0 
Greece 
8.1 
0.6 
1.64 
0.252 
3241 
1080 
Italy 
4.3 
2.1 
0.462 
0.562 
7102 
2280 
Malta 
3.0 
0 
0.255 
0 
21 
0 
Tajikistan 
5.0 
0 
0.625 
0 
NA 
NA 
Turkey 
2.2 
0.44 
0.121 
0.053 
5500 
4300 
Uzbekistan 
3.0 
0 
0.225 
0 
250 
0 
Total  
 
 
 
 
18774 
8090 
 
• 
These countries, like other European countries also have been accepting immigrants from the Middle 
East and Africa. The effect of these migrations is not mirrored in the table, since it is a changing picture 
each year. The table reflects only the indigenous population. In general migrations are introducing 
more SCD than β-thalassaemia.  
• 
The estimate of affected births is not calculated since in the countries with the highest carrier 
prevalence, effective prevention programs, developed and running for several decades, have 
significantly affected birth incidence.  
• 
Cyprus, Greece, Italy and Turkey have developed services both for prevention and patient care, within 
systems of socio-economic coverage; this means catering for both financial and psychosocial needs of 
patients. Tukey being a large country with areas with les development and having the major 
migration/refugee issues, has regional deficiencies in patient care, which however authorities are 
trying to address.  
• 
In the rest of this group of countries services provided do not satisfy all needs to the same extent. This 
increases the burden of disease and results in poor outcomes for patients. 
Albania: this is a country with just under 3 million people. Both β-thalassaemia and SCD are prevalent with 
treatment centres being concentrated in 2 locations, the Mother Tereza Hospital in Tirana and the General 
hospital of Lushnjë. Published literature is scarce but according to the latest report (2022) from collaborators in 
the country the following information is provided: 
• 
Patient numbers are: 291 thalassaemia major (180 Tirana, 110 Lushnje, 1 Fier) and 290 sickle cell 
syndromes (190 Lushnje, 5 Fier, 95 Tirana) with 7 new births in Tirana in 3 years. There are no known 
HbH cases [According to a report in 2022] 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
373 
• 
Blood transfusion: Shortages are seasonal in July /August. However, there is also a chronic shortage 
since donations in Albania are 12/1000 inhabitants. Safety is now assured since the national Transfusion 
service is now well equipped and is centralised since 2010.  
• 
Iron chelation – all 3 chelators are available and free of charge.  
• 
MRI is still not available  
• 
Multidisciplinary care: Works well in Lushnje with the hospital service. In Tirana patients have to be 
referred by the family physician to specialists; this is usually not proactive monitoring but referral once 
a complication is suspected 
• 
Prevention: no national program. If premarital couples are informed by their GP they go to private lab. 
2nd affected child prevention is practiced  
These practices are not conducive to optimal care and good outcomes. 
Azerbaijan: Azerbaijan is a country of high prevalence for beta thalassaemia. With the carrier rate of 4%-8.6%, 
β-thalassemia is one of the most prevalent hereditary disorders in the country {129}. There are almost 2000 
patients with haemoglobin disorders under treatment in the country, or around 1 per 5000 of the population, 
amounting to a significant public health burden. 
All patients in the country are treated in one centre in 
Baku, the Republican Thalassaemia Centre and investigated and provided with blood for transfusion again by 
one centre, the Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine. This means that clinical and scientific 
expertise are concentrated and gained for the benefit of patients.  
• 
There is considerable support for this centre from the Heydar Aliyev Foundation, making the services 
sustainable and allowing development. There is also support from the Azerbaijan Thalassaemia 
Association, headed by a group of well-informed patients.  
• 
There is universal health coverage under a compulsory health insurance system since 2021 and not out 
of pocket expenses for patients.  
With these advantages there has been progress over several years. A prevention program of premarital 
screening is mandated by law since 2015; there is also genetic counselling of at-risk couples and the offer of 
prenatal diagnosis. Since 2015 over 500000 people have been tested of which 3.7% have been found to carriers 
of beta thalassaemia.  
Deficiencies in the quality of care are expressed by patients which must be given consideration: 
• 
Reactions to blood transfusion are frequent. There is no haemovigilance programme and so these 
reactions may not be reported. It was confirmed, for example that 20-25% of the patients have been 
infected by HCV (in the Azeri population of blood donors, around 5% are carriers of this virus). 
• 
There are periodic interruptions in supplies of chelating agents, especially of desferrioxamine. 
Measurement of cardiac and liver iron by MRI is still not available and so those that can afford it travel 
to other countries, mainly Turkey, for their annual tests. 
• 
Vaccinations and post-splenectomy prophylaxis do not seem to be offered.  
• 
The element of multi-disciplinary care, with monitoring by cardiologists or endocrinologists at least is 
not offered. 
It is clear that despite progress, there are still gaps in the provision of optimal care in this country in which 
resources are limited (GDP/cap = 7736.7usd and 5.9% of the population lives below the national poverty line in 
2021)   
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
374 
Bulgaria: Bulgaria has a carrier frequency of 2.4% overall, but carriers are mostly in specific regions, along the 
Black Sea coast and the south. New affected births each year are estimated at 11 while the latest estimate for 
the prevalence is around 300 patients. If however, we consider an average of 6% carriers in the coasted areas 
where the population is around 1 million, then the homozygote’s birth rate in these regions goes up to 0.9/1000 
which means that 9 babies may be born is these regions alone. There is need to create a national patient register 
for thalassaemia, which will help greatly in describing the true picture and identify patients living in low 
prevalence areas of the country. Bulgaria’s health system is based on a compulsory social health insurance 
scheme, with a single purchaser - the National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF), despite this some are uninsured 
and so out-of-pocket health spending is often necessary. To what extent this affects thalassaemia patients is 
uncertain. In general, all basic treatment is offered free of charge, including monitoring with MRI techniques for 
all patients, according to guidelines. There is a growing adult patient population, whose iron status is improving 
over the years [130]. 
Prevention is not centrally organized and there is limited or no recorded effect on birth incidence, and there is 
limited use of prenatal diagnosis. 
Cyprus: this was one of the first countries to respond to the high burden of β-thalassaemia, dating from the 
early 1970s. Carrier rates were estimated at 15-17% in the 1960s even though over the years the rate seems to 
have fallen to 12-14% [131, 132]. The approach in Cyprus was comprehensive from the beginning, combining 
prevention, based mainly on premarital screening and improving patient management according to the 
evolution of evidence based clinical guidelines. 
From a recent analysis of the Cyprus thalassaemia registry (care of Dr S. Christou 2020) the following age 
distribution is obtained for patients with β-thalassaemia major: The mean age of patients 42.3 years, (median 
44 years), with a gradual reduction due to patient loss in the 6th decade. 
 
 
Figure 5. Age distribution of β-thalassaemia major patients in Cyprus 
 
In the recently published data, 538 TDT patients were studied over a total of 19,083 patient years. Median age 
at 30/12/18 was 40.9 yrs, IQR 38.0- 47.6 [133]. Overall, the mortality was 5.0 per 1000 patient years follow up. 
The causes of death are shown to be shifting away from cardiac deaths to, liver, infectious causes and 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
375 
malignancy deaths. In a more detailed analysis of the same cohort, which almost all of the TDT patients in 
Cyprus, 80.4% of individuals survive to 50 years of age. The effect of genotype on survival and complication 
rates is analysed in ref 132, indicating that delays in transfusion and iron chelation due to milder genotype has 
resulted in more severe long-term outcomes. 
Concerning the complications of TDT the figures reported by the treatment centres of Cyprus, are comparable 
to the reported results from Greece and Italy, and seem, at national level to be the best at this time. 48.9% have 
a serum ferritin level <1000ng/ml, 85.4% have a cardiac T2* >20ms and 51% an LIC <3 mg/g dw (73.5%< 7 mg/g 
dw). At the same time almost 30% have completed tertiary education and 74% are working full time, while 
around 50% are married or cohabiting [134]. These results are indicative of strong support from the health 
authorities and the community. 
The adult population of thalassaemia patients are active in various professions and the reduction in new births, 
demonstrate the reduction in ‘burden’ that conventional therapy allows. 
 
North Macedonia: From past surveys, the average incidence of beta-thalassemia (thal) trait is 2.6% [135]. This 
is a small country of 2 million people, with few reported patients – only 25 last reported to TIF.  
The HDI is currently 0.784 – high ranking but still below its neighbours. There is a compulsory insurance-based 
health system, with near universal coverage. There have been reports from patients of low pre-transfusion Hb 
but detailed information on patient outcomes is not available. No prevention program is active.  
 
Greece: The National Registry for Haemoglobinopathies in Greece (NRHG) was established in 2009. In 2012 the 
first review of the registry was published and in 2019 the analysis of the period 2010 to 2015 was published [136]. 
The total number of registered patients in this report is 4032, 2099 (52.06%), of these are categorized as TDT; 
873 (21.65%) are NTDT patients; 1032 (25.6%) patients had sickle cell anaemia (SCA) or S/β-thalassaemia. The 
total number of alive patients per age group during this period is provided in Figure 6 below: 
 
Figure 6. Age distribution of registered cases 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
376 
The peak of patient distribution corresponds to the age group of 36–45 years among TM patients, 46–55 years 
among TI cases, and 41–50 years among sickle cell disease (SCD). These results are comparable to those of Italy, 
UK and Cyprus. In a study of 201 eligible adult patients [median (interquartile range, IQR) age 45.7 (40.2–50.5) 
years; 75.6% > 40 years old; the average pre-transfusion haemoglobin, median (IQR), was 9.9 (9.4–10.3) g/dL; 
the average serum ferritin, median (IQR), was 549.3 (287.2–1034.8) μg/L, with 70% having ferritin <1000 μg/L; 
MRI LIC, median (IQR), 2.2 (1.3–4.8) mg Fe/g dw; myocardial T2*, was Normal (>20 ms) in 90.5% and mild (≥14 
to ≤20 ms) in2.5% [137]. 
Despite good outcomes barriers to access health care among beta-thalassaemia patients receiving transfusions 
still persist, especially for those who live far from transfusion centres and have lower incomes [138] 
In a multicentric study of TDT patients in Greece the participants’ mean age was 39 ± 9 years (range:18–68). 
Almost half of the study population were married (46%) and had offspring (42%). Most participants had a higher 
educational level (77%), and 59% were employed. Only 7% of the participants had an abnormal heart MRI T2*, 
whereas 39% of the participants had an abnormal liver MRI T2*. Health related quality of life was assessed, and 
it was noted that despite good medical care adult TDT patients exhibit significantly lower HRQoL compared to 
the general Greek population. Employed TDT patients exhibited both significantly and clinically higher quality 
of life scores. The relevance to burden of disease is that employment, allowed by good clinical care enhances 
quality of life and wellbeing [139]. 
 
Italy: Italian health services have a long tradition of development of both prevention and patient management 
with good survival and morbidity outcomes. The best known are the series of publications by Borgna-Pignatti 
over the years [140]. Here we refer to the latest presentation, which is based on the WebThal database [141]. 
The cohort in this study represents 3,986 thalassaemia patients treated at 36 centres in Italy, which treat over 
50% of the total number of patients in the country. For patients with thalassaemia major, 68% were aged ≥35 
years and 11% were aged ≤18 years. Patients with thalassaemia intermedia were slightly older: 
 
Figure 7. Distribution of age of patients with thalassaemia syndromes at 36 treatment centres in Italy 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
377 
This age distribution bears witness to the successful provision of conventional treatment in Italy and compares 
well with Cyprus and Greece. This also holds true where the complication rates are concerned. It also 
demonstrates the limitations of conventional treatment in allowing for a ‘normal’ lifespan to all patients, even 
under the best conditions. 
A second registry exists covering 182 centres and 1873 TDT patients [142]. An interesting observation from this 
registry was that centres which treated 30-80 patients show a higher percentage of appropriately monitored 
patients compared to centres with fewer patients, supporting the need for reference centres.  
A recent study of a longitudinal cohort of 709 transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia major patients (51.1% 
males) born between 1970 and 1997 and followed through 2020 at seven major centres in Italy, showed an 
overall survival probability at 30 years being 93.3% (95%CI: 88.6-98.3) in the youngest birth cohort (1985-1997). 
Concluding that survival in patients with β-thalassemia major continues to improve with adequate access to 
care, best practice sharing, continued research, and collaboration between centres [143]. Older patients are 
more likely to develop multiple disease-related morbidities, including osteoporosis, endocrine disorders, liver 
disease, renal dysfunction, and cancer. Research into clinical outcomes of the older generation of thalassaemia 
patients, which is increasing in numbers, is needed [144]. In an analysis of 214 TDT patients from Italy, the mean 
was 46.7years; this compared to most of the patients of the world is a very satisfying record and evidence of 
the good application of conventional therapy. Yet the mortality rate is still much higher than matched controls; 
this same group of patients had a healthcare resource utilization which increases with age (e.g. out-patient 
service rates). So the burden of TDT must be seen in this light as demanding more and more services, and not 
simply as an improving outcome [Udeze C, Dovizio M, Veronesi C, Esposti LD, Li N, Dang TXMP, Forni GL. 
Mortality, Clinical Complications, and Healthcare Resource Utilization Associated with Managing Transfusion-
Dependent β-Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease with Recurrent Vaso-occlusive Crises in Italy. Pharmacoecon 
Open. 2024 Oct 28. doi: 10.1007/s41669-024-00532-4.]  
Italy is one of the few countries in which near optimal care is offered to patients free from out-of-pocket 
expenses and through good clinical care and reduction of new affected births has reduced the burden of 
disease. However, immigration of both refugee and economic migrations is altering the epidemiology of 
haemoglobin disorders and especially increasing sickle cell disease prevalence [145] 
 
Malta: a small but developed country with a very high HDI (0.918). Only 29 patients are followed with the 
predominance of a mild β++ mutation (IVS1-6). No published data on patient outcomes and there is no 
prevention program. 
 
Turkey: a large Mediterranean country with a variable gene frequency of β- thalassaemia across its territory. It 
is reported that there are 5500 known patients but in one study of treatment centres, and considering missing 
data, infrequent care for NTD β-thalassemia patients, and other errors, there may be as many as 8000 patients 
both TDT and NTDT [146]. This same study estimated that the total annual direct medical care cost was 
approximately USD 95,491,900 in Turkey, with TD β-thalassemia patients accounting for USD 58,347,900 
(61.1%), and concludes that the costs reported were likely underestimated. This is a considerable burden for 
this upper middle income country which also has a large refugee population from neighbouring Syria, which 
also has a high frequency of thalassaemia. Services to thalassaemia patients, including refugees is under 
Universal Healthcare Insurance. However, there is a parallel private healthcare option and some out of pocket 
expenses are required.  
In 2012 the Turkish Society of Pediatric Hematology set up a National Registry for Hemoglobinopathies. A 
recent review of the registry produced an age distribution as follows: 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
378 
 
Figure 8. Age distribution of β-thalassaemia patients in Turkey 
This is a relatively young patient population, which is due to the variable quality of services in a large country 
and to a large refugee population. [147].  
A hemoglobinopathy control program has been implemented since 2003 and has reduced the annual affected 
births in recent years.  
Countries with a carrier rate for β-thalassaemia <2%: 
Of these countries Romania, Spain and Portugal have patient populations which have drawn attention of health 
authorities while little is known about the countries of central Asia (the ‘stans’). 
Romania: β-Thalassemia is uncommon in the Romanian population, with an uneven distribution across the 
country. Carrier rate is estimated at 1% and there are 200-300 affected patients. Most patients are treated at 
the “National Institute of Transfusion Hematology”) every 2-6 weeks, and every 3 months biochemical values 
and virus infection markers are monitored. However, there is no proactive multidisciplinary follow up and no 
MRI assessment of iron overload.  
Only 5 new cases expected every year in a country with a population 20 million. This makes this condition a rare 
disease in this country. There is no screening program, but prenatal diagnosis is possible [148].  
Spain: Thalassaemia is a rare disease in Spain. In an update of the Spanish registry of haemoglobinopathies 
(REHem-AR), published in 2024, there were 187 recorded cases of β-Thalassemia, 115 (54%) TDT and 72 NTDT 
and 27 had HbH disease. This is a significant increase on the recorded cases of the 2020 report [149]; there are 
also 1317 SCD patients on the registry. The geographical distribution across the country is very heterogeneous 
with a prevalence ranging from 0.1% to 5% [150]. The sickle cell genes are much more common and increasing 
because of migrations mainly from Africa.  
Portugal: like Spain there are very few β-Thalassemia patients (around 40) but almost 1000 SCD patients, also 
enhanced by migrations 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0-10 years
10-20 years
20-30 years
30-40 years
40-50 years
The number of registered patients
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
379 
Low prevalence European countries: 
This group are mainly Northern European countries in which migrations have introduced haemoglobinopathy 
genes, mostly in the 20th and 21st centuries. The main host countries are UK, France, the Netherlands, 
Germany and the Nordic countries. No country is exempt from these migrations and Italy, Greece, Cyprus, 
Turkey are also adding to their disease burden, especially of the sickle cell syndromes. [151].  
Of the host countries the UK and France have historically the oldest permanent populations which originated 
from high prevalence areas due to their colonial history. For this reason, policies to address the 
haemoglobinopathy burden were developed. 
Table 17. Prevalence of β-Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease in Low Prevalence European Countries 
Country  
Known β-
Thalassemia 
patients 
β-Thalassemia 
patients/100,000 
Known SCD 
patients 
SCD patients/ 
100,000 
United Kingdom 
1790 
2.6 
12913 
19 
Netherlands 
350 
1.98 
2000 
11.3 
Germany 
600 
0.72 
5000 
6 
France 
800 
1.23 
32400 
50 
Denmark 
83 
1.4 
236 
3.98 
Sweden 
140 
1.3 
584 
5.5 
 
In considering the figures in the table it is noted that they based on estimates since apart from the UK and 
France other countries do not have a registry (under development in Germany), so figures are estimates from 
local experts; in addition, figures may be changing from year to year because migrations continue, and also new 
affected births are not controlled. In the UK a program of ante-natal clinic screening has been ongoing for many 
years; this is supported by counselling and prenatal diagnosis services.  
The UK Haemoglobinopathy Registry (https://nssg.oxford-haematology.org.uk/red-cell/documents/patient-
information/nhr-patient-information-leaflet.pdf Annual Data Report 2020/21 last accessed 07/09/2024) 
provided the data for the numbers of patients and for the age distribution of thalassaemia patients. The 
younger patients are due to the difficulty of reaching all affected families in a multi-cultural society as well as 
new migrations. The older age groups are the result of optimal clinical management in reference centres even 
though many immigrant families reside in areas where clinics may see less than 5 patients.  
 
Figure 9. Thalassaemia patients in the UK by age group (copied from the Annual data Report 2020-2021). 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
380 
 
The 10-year crude mortality rate is 6.2% for the UK thalassaemia patients. If compared to the age/sex adjusted 
death rate in the general population, which is 1.2%, this suggests that even in a country offering optimum 
conventional care a ‘normal’ life span is not supported. Similar conclusions arise from a 2024 study of 237 TDT 
patients with a mortality of 1.19 per 100 person years, compared to 0.2/100 in controls. Like the Italian patient 
population morbidity and service usage increases with age [Udeze C, Ly NF, Ingleby FC, Fleming SD, Conner SC, 
Howard J, Li N, Shah F. Clinical Burden and Healthcare Resource Utilization Associated With Managing 
Transfusion-dependent β-Thalassemia in England. Clin Ther. 2024 Nov 1:S0149-2918(24)00287-X. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinthera.2024.09.024.]  
These programs in Europe include newborn screening which are designed for identification of sickle cell 
patients.  
A national thalassaemia registry is ongoing in France with similar results [152]. As in the UK, the strong health 
service infrastructure allows for optimal care in reference centres but in regions of the country where patient 
density is particularly low the lack of clinical experience leads to a reduction in service quality. For example, the 
result of the national registry presented in 2019 indicated the of 666 patients (441 with TM) the median age was 
23 years. Only 50-60% of patients had had an MRI iron measurement [153]. These reports are confirmed by a 
2024 report which indicates that patients with TDT in France experience significant clinical complications, 
elevated mortality, and substantial healthcare resource utilization [Baldwin J, Udeze C, Li N, Boulmerka L, 
Dahal L, Pesce G, Quignot N, Jiang H, Galactéros F. Clinical burden and healthcare resource utilization 
associated with managing transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia in France. Curr Med Res Opin. 2024 
Aug;40(8):1289-1295. doi: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2368197.] 
In Germany an SCD registry has been established with an estimated number of at least 2000 patients [154]. 
Also, newborn screening is ongoing [155]. However, thalassaemia is regarded as a rare disease and there is no 
registry yet. As a rare disease requiring complex clinical protocols, the level of patient care is heterogeneous, 
and patient reports indicate that many are undertransfused (Hb 7-8g/dl). This indicates a major need in the 
Northern European setting where a rare disease policy is yet to be applied and a hub and spoke arrangement 
to support patients from reference centres has not been applied.  
Similarly, Sweden and Denmark are countries with a very robust healthcare infrastructure but where 
thalassaemia is rare. Quality improvement programs are ongoing through professional groups such as the 
Nordic Forum for haemoglobin disorders.  
The general agreement is that the burden of these diseases is increasing in Europe and so policy makers and 
professionals are alerted to plan for services which will favour the best patient outcomes.  
 
WHO American Region (PAH) 
Epidemiology  
In the American continent thalassaemia is are rare condition while sickle cell disease is much more common. 
TIF has active members in 5 countries with a thalassaemia prevalence: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Trinidad and 
Tobago, and USA. There are contacts with individual patients from Mexico, Cuba, Venezuela and Surinam. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
381 
Table 18. Estimated Prevalence of β-Thalassemia and Sickle Cell Disease in Select Countries of the Americas and 
Health Indicators 
Country 
 
β-thalassaemia 
carrier rate 
Estimated number 
of patients b-thal 
Sickle cell disease 
carrier rate 
Estimated SCD 
patients 
Argentina 
1.35% 
0.8% in 4000 
donors [156] 
No data 
0.7% 
No data 
Uruguay 
0.41% [157] 
No data 
0.76% (2.22% in 
Afro descendants)  
No data 
Jamaica 
1% [159] 
No data 
9.8% (neonatal 
screening) [ 158] 
No data 
Brazil 
0.25%-3% 
maximum in Sao 
Paolo [162] 
382 TM+ 280TI= 
662 
2% (neonatal 
screening) [160, 
161] 
1.1% to 9.8% in 
various regions 
[162] 
30500 
Canada  
0.5% +0.25% E 
[164] 
1200 est  
0.76% [163, 165] 
5000 [8] 
USA 
0.4% -1.55% [167] 
1379 (CAF est) 
0.75% 
100000 [166] 
Trinidad &Tobago 
3.5%-6.7% [168] 
100 
9.9% (9.32% by 
NBS) 
No data 
Colombia 
No data 
No data 
7.9% [169] 5-12% 
in coastal areas 
[170] 
No data 
Cuba 
0.45% 
No data 
3% [171] 
4000 [172] 
Suriname  
1% 
No data 
7% (11.4% in 
Creoles [173] 
No data 
Country 
 
IMR/1000 
livebirths 
Under 5 
mortality/1000 
Life expectancy 
Healthy life 
expectancy at 
birth HALE 
Argentina 
6 
6.9 
77.98 
75.39 
Uruguay 
5 
5.8 
78.16 
75.44 
Jamaica 
10.9 
12.4 
72.37 
70.5 
Brazil 
12.9 
14.4 
76.57 
56.4 
Canada  
4 
5 
83.02 
81.63 
USA 
5.1 
6.2 
79.74 
76.33 
Trinidad &Tobago 
15 
16.3 
74.87 
72.97 
Colombia 
11 
12.8 
77.51 
72.83 
Cuba 
4.1 
5 
78.33 
73.68 
Suriname 
15.4 
17.2 
72.79 
62.4 
 
 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
382 
Table 19. Health Expenditure and Performance in the Americas: HDI Rank, World Bank Data, and UHC Index 
Country  
HDI rank 
WB rank 
HE/cap   WB 
data USD 
HE/%GDP 
WB data 
UHC index 
Argentina 
0.842 
UMIC 
863.71 
10.56 
79 
Uruguay 
0.809 
High 
1429.51 
9.15 
82 
Jamaica 
0.709 
UMIC 
325.72 
6.61 
74 
Brazil 
0.754 
UMIC 
700.71 
10.31 
80 
Canada 
0.922 
High 
6086.08 
11.68 
91 
USA 
0.921 
High 
11702.41 
18.82 
86 
Trinidad & Tobago 
0.810 
High 
1030.71 
7.31 
75 
Colombia 
0.752 
UMIC 
477.27 
8.99 
80 
Cuba 
0.767 
UMIC 
1186.16 
12.49 
83 
Suriname 
0.730 
UMIC 
459.56 
6.77 
63 
 
Affected countries of the Americas are all either Upper Middle Income or high-income countries according to 
World Bank rankings. However, health expenditure varies considerably, and this is reflected in health 
performance; those with a low expenditure per capita (Jamaica, Brazil, Colombia and Suriname) having the 
highest IMR, under 5 mortality and the lowest life expectancy including Healthy life expectancy at birth HALE. 
Beta thalassaemia is indeed a rare condition in the Americas but as a multi-organ disorder it requires daily 
treatment and constant multidisciplinary monitoring and care. Treatment is shared in the same clinical settings 
as SCD  
• 
TIF data suggest that there are about 200- 300 affected births annually in the Americas. The patient 
population is unknown since there are no patient registries and national reports are rare. From TIF 
member associations reports, from some but not all counties of the region, we estimate 6500- 7000 
patients with beta thalassaemia syndromes across the continent.  
• 
Estimated costs along with other epidemiological information are scarce in the region. A recent, USA 
2019, study indicated an average total healthcare costs per patient per year (PPPY) for regularly 
transfused patients at USD 128,062 [174]. These costs are much lower in other countries (for example 
in the UAE the mean annual direct cost was found to be USD 35,713 [175], which is likely to be nearer 
to the cost in counties like Brazil provided that optimum care is available. 
The level of care and patient outcomes are known to be of a high level in reference centres, especially in north 
America. Little is known concerning patient care in the rest of the continent with the exception of Brazil, where 
an active patient driven organization (ABRASTA, a member of TIF) has promoted service development and 
guideline development [176]. In an evaluation of iron overload of 136 patients, 92% TDT, with a median age of 
18 years, and median baseline ferritin 2.033ng/ml (range: 59-14,123) and LIC 8.4(1.0−51.0/9.4) mg/g dw. [177]. 
These results are indicative of a fair level of care in the major reference centres of Brazil. 
This level of service development has not reached all patients across Brazil. In many Brazilian states access to 
health services is difficult because of the long distances but also because of the rarity of thalassaemia. In such 
a setting prevention programs such as screening are difficult to implement. Newborn screening is practiced and 
in one report β-thalassaemia was found in 1.96% of the samples tested [178]. In another report on 8,952 people, 
Sickle cell trait was detected in 2.49% (2.10 – 2.97%) and minor thalassemia 1.1% (0 0.84 – 1.43%). 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
383 
Likewise in Argentina a 0.8% incidence of thalassaemic carriers among 4000 blood donors was diagnosed [179]. 
Optimal treatment for b-thalassaemia has been established in reference centres in Buenos Aires (Aurora Feliu 
Torres / Gabriela Sciuccati, communication to TIF) but not necessarily in all peripheral centres. 
 
Trinidad &Tobago: these Caribbean islands have the highest prevalence of β- thalassaemia genes in the 
Americas. This is mainly among the 35.4% who are of Indian origin, brought form India in the 19th century as 
plantation workers; 3.5% carry β- thalassaemia. Only 63 patients are identified as being under treatment and 
the level of care has not reached optimal levels even though blood transfusion and chelation are provided free; 
multidisciplinary monitoring is still to be upgraded. In a recent poster describing the state of beta-thalassemia 
major patients, 90% had a pre-transfusion Hb of <8g/dl (ave 7.16g/dl) and significantly elevated serum ferritin 
levels [180].  
 
USA: In this country a national surveillance registry exists for SCD and includes all thalassaemia syndromes but 
does not cover the whole country. Like the European countries, thalassaemia syndromes are increasing in the 
USA due to migrations, mainly from Asia and affecting more the west coast. The latest figures for β-
thalassaemia and E/β-thalassaemia are of 1379 cases. SCD is much more common with around 70-100000 cases.  
The US a Thalassaemia Clinical Research Network is a collaboration of the major reference centres in the 
country but does not cover all patients with thalassaemia since many live in areas where each medical unit 
serves a very small number of patients. In this respect also the USA resembles Northern Europe. The quality of 
care in refence centres and the Clinical Research Network is of a high level and innovative as well as 
conventional treatments are on trial.  
In a study adult thalassaemia patients two groups were compared, those 18 to 39 years and those older than 40 
years. The younger group were mostly Asian in origin and included thalassaemia syndromes such as 
haemoglobin E/b-thalassaemia, HbH Constant Spring and HbH disease; the older group were mostly of Greek 
or Italian ancestry and had predominantly β-thalassaemia (TDT & NTDT). The achievements in education and 
employment are similar to those of the European reference centres as is the control of iron overload (Serum 
ferritin in the last 12 months mean 2434ng/ml in the younger group and 1251ng/ml in the older group, LIC (by 
MRI) 10. 6mg/g dw SD10.5 in the younger group and 4.5mg/g dw in the older group). Complication rates are 
also similar to European reference centres. [181]. These outcomes reflect the achievements of current evidence-
based protocols in large countries where the majority of patients benefit from experienced medical care, while 
some are treated in peripheral centres. Very few patients are not covered by health insurance.  
 
 
Figure 10. Age distribution of patients from the Cooley’s Anemia Foundation Database 2021 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
384 
This indicates a younger age group compared to refence countries in Europe, but the effect of recent migrations 
must be considered.  
Carrier screening is limited and voluntary with no national policy. Newborn screening is, however, almost 
universal [182.] 
Projected lifetime healthcare costs were estimated to be $7.1 million for patients with TDT at age 50 compared 
to $235,000 for matched controls. After age 36, each additional year of life added $152,482 to the total lifetime 
costs for patients with TDT and $7258 to those for matched controls. [183]. This study used administrative 
claims data to evaluate real-world clinical complications, treatments, HCRU, and healthcare costs in patients 
with TDT in the United States. However, indirect healthcare costs (e.g. absenteeism, presenteeism, etc.) were 
not included so total cost may be even higher.  
In a recent study of thalassaemia related deaths in the USA, from 1999 to 2020, there were 2797 deaths, 74% 
had beta thalassemia and 18% had alpha thalassemia. Most deaths are still cardiovascular but 18% had 
malignancies. Infection which is so common in many thalassaemia populations was the cause of death in only 
3% of cases. Overall, there is a decreasing trend in thalassemia-related mortality over the years. Weaknesses in 
this study include the lack of information on the comorbidity burden, or the prior interventions [184]. 
Canada: has almost as many thalassaemia patients as the USA – around 1200 with about 5000 SCD patients 
 
WHO African Region (AFR) 
Only 2 countries in this WHO region have a significant thalassaemia problem -these are Algeria, which is an 
Arab and Berber population similar its Maghreb neighbours, and Mauritius which has a large proportion of 
people of Asian origin.  
 
Algeria: despite the absence of a national registry, a multicentre, retrospective, cross-sectional, descriptive 
study, conducted in 2017 indicated an increasing adult population. 
 
Figure 11. Figure 11. Age Distribution of Thalassaemia Major Patients in Algeria 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
385 
Age distribution of Algerian thalassaemia patients [185]: Average age is 18,21 +/- 9 years. Average pre-
transfusion Haemoglobin 8,05 g/dl (7-10,5 g/dl ) and average serum ferritin is 3281ng/ml; Cardiac arrhythmias 
in 
48.72%, Hepatic Fibrosis in 47.61%, Hypogonadism in 60.7%, Hypothyroidism in 21,67%, 
hypoparathyroidism in 14,31% and diabetes in 25,49%. In a newer report by Dr Djenouni (Conference Report 
2024) she made the following comments on the current situation in 2024: the transfusion program for major 
thalassaemia is inadequate, due to insufficient blood donation. Only two chelators are available in Algeria: 
Deferoxamine and Deferasirox and there is a lack of infusion pumps for Deferoxamine use. Even so there is a 
reduction in the frequency of complications and an improvement in median survival.  
β Thalassemia ranks second after sickle cell disorders in Algeria, with 0.1/1000 annual expected β-thalassaemia 
births compared to 0.17/1000 with SCD. The estimated number of thalassaemia patients is 1500-3000 compared 
to almost 5000 with SCD.  
The average age of major thalassemia TDT is 17.90 years, [range 1-44 years], while that of intermediate form 
(NTDT) is 23 years old with extremes of [range1-61 years] [186]. Monitoring of iron overload is based mainly on 
serum ferritin while only 8.8% of patients received cardiac and hepatic MRI which is limited to the capital 
Algiers. 
From information provided at a virtual meeting with TIF in September 2022, local experts informed TIF that two 
only iron chelation agents are available, but they are provided free of charge. The conclusion is that the burden 
of disease is high in Algeria with much effort to improve services outside the capital being required.  
Mauritius: Mauritius is a small island in the Indian Ocean, with a population of approximately 1.25 million. 68% 
of the population are of Indian origin and thalassaemia is prevalent in this community. 3.85% carry β 
Thalassemia. In a TIF delegation visit in 2019, there were 110 known thalassaemia patients and around the same 
number of SCD patients. There was no clinical service specifically devoted to thalassemia and patients were 
transfused in various hospitals. However, a national Thalassaemia Society of Mauritius (TSM) was created in 
2009 which has promoted service development and the training of both medical and nursing staff. The Ministry 
of Health has supported their effort, and free care is offered in public hospitals for all patients, with no out of 
pocket expenses. A “Standard protocols & guidelines for management of patients with thalassemia” was 
launched in 2022 with the collaboration of TIF and the Ministry. This development effort is ongoing and 
outcomes for patients are expected to improve in the coming years. 
 
SURVIVAL DATA 
In the European countries (WHO region), where around 1025 new annual affected births may be expected, there 
are 25200 recorded patients (in hospital/clinic/Regional/or national based registries). This is probably the most 
accurate record of patient numbers, compared to other regions of the world. In 20 years, there should be 45700 
if there is no effective prevention program. This gives a ratio of births to patients of 0.04. In the Arab World 8240 
new cases are expected with currently 91400 recorded patients and a ratio 0,09. In the WHO Southeast Asia 
region plus Pakistan, then estimate is of 257000 patients with 42000 expected annually. The ratio in this region 
is 0.163 indicating a much higher death rate in childhood. There is a gradation of survival across regions of the 
world reflecting a different burden of premature mortality. 
Survival of patients in all countries depends on the birth cohort since older patients suffered from treatment 
which was suboptimal by today’s standards during their early years. Iron toxicity damage was therefore 
inevitable even though chelation and monitoring improved over the years. An example is the Kaplan- Meyer 
chart from Cyprus. 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
386 
 
Figure 12. Survival Functions - Cyprus 
 
 
Figure 13. Distribution of 1385 transfusion-dependent patients by age and gender, Mazandaran Province, 2016 
 
This current survival data bear witness to the successful provision of conventional treatment in Italy, Cyprus and 
Greece. This also holds true where the complication rates are concerned (see Table 1). It also demonstrates the 
limitations of conventional treatment in allowing for a ‘normal’ lifespan to all patients, even under the best 
conditions. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
387 
Another example is that of Taiwan (China): The analysis of patient survival data is based on a nationwide 
population-based cohort study [19] analysed between 2007–2011; the data was obtained from the Taiwanese 
National Health Insurance Research Database. After excluding those patients receiving hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, 454 patients were included. The median age was 17.2 years (range, 0.1–48.0 years), indicating 
a young population receiving less than optimum management, despite a good health infrastructure and 
universal coverage (99%); the NHI program in Taiwan has covered all treatment expenses since 1995.  In 
addition, 58.1% patients being younger than 20 years, probably an indication of a poor prevention effort. 
However, survival probability was calculated to be satisfactory. This is a young population of patients with need 
to upgrade monitoring and treatment: 
 
 
Figure 14. Survival probability of patients with thalassaemia major in 
Taiwan, 2007-2011. 44 (9.7%) of the 454 patients died. No significant 
difference in the survival probability between female and male patiens. 
(log-rank test, P = 0.57) 
 
 
 
 
Table 20. Reference Countries 
Country  
Cyprus  
Greece 
Greece 
Italy 
Italy 
Centre 
2 centres (50%) 
1 centre (Aghia 
Sophia) 
National 
MIOT centres 
WEBTHAL 36 
centres 
Year 
2020 
2019 
2015 
2019 
2020 
Number of patients 
 
 
2099 
 
3149 
Median age  
44 
33.3 
36-45 
31.17 
37 (4-78) 
Heart disease 
8.8% 
8.6% 
28.14% 
4.4% 
30.2% 
Hypogonadism 
28.4% 
21.6% 
 
 
 
Bone disease 
33.7% 
 
 
 
 
Hypothyroidism 
13% 
20.7% 
 
 
9.5% 
Diabetes 
14.7% 
7.3% 
 
 
8.3% 
Malignancies 
 
6.1% 
6% 
 
 
HCV + 
 
 
 
 
 
Ferritin <1000 
48.9% 
 
56% 
 
 
Ferritin 1-2500 
25.9% 
 
30% 
 
 
Ferritin >2500 
25.2% 
 
14% 
 
 
Mean Ferritin 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiac T2* >20 
85.4% 
86.5% 
86.49% 
88% 
85% 
Cardiac T2* 10-19 
10.1% 
7.4% 
7.43% 
 
12% 
CardiacT2* <9 
4.5% 
6.1% 
6.07% 
 
3% 
LIC <3 
51% 
52.1% 
51.84% 
 
45% 
LIC 3-7 
22.5% 
18.5% 
18.38% 
 
29% 
LIC 7-15 
13% 
14.6% 
15.07% 
 
16% 
LIC >15 
13.5% 
13.5% 
14.71% 
 
10% 
 
DISEASE BURDEN OF TRANSFUSION DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
388 
Table 21. Countries of Europe and Asia where programmes for TDT exist 
Country  
United 
Kingdom 
Australia 
Indonesia 
Iran (Islamic 
Rep. of)  
Iran (Islamic 
Rep. of)  
France  
Thailand 
Malaysia 
Sri Lanka 
Egypt 
Iraq 
Maldives 
Centre 
National 
National 
Cipto 
centre 
Shiraz 
Mazandaran  
National 
Multicenter 
National 
National 
 
Dohuk  
National 
Year  
2019 
2019 
2018 
2019 
2019 
2013 
2017 
2019 
2019 
2019 
2019 
2018 
Number of 
patients 
612 
 
238 
713 
 
268 
127 
2676 
1177 
 
150 
81 
Median age 
Adults  
>18 
>18 
10-62 
30± 9.7 
21 (2-56) 
 27.8±11.4 
10-14.9 
13.2±7.6 
13 
13 (1-
35) 
 
Heart disease 
18% 
 
 
72.6% 
 
18.6% 
4%HF 
 
 
 
2.7% 
 
Hypogonadism  
 
 
 
10.7% 
 
47% 
11% 
22% 
 
 
52.8% 
 
Bone disease 
40% 
 
 
15.9% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hypothyroidism 
 
 
 
 
 
9.6% 
7.1% 
 
 
 
7.3% 
 
Diabetes 
40% 
 
 
 
 
7.8% 
7.9% 
 
 
 
3.3% 
 
Malignancies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HCV + 
 
 
 
 
 
20.6% 
 
 
 
 
35.3% 
 
Ferritin <1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.18% 
 
0% 
 
11.8% 
Ferritin 1-2500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35.17% 
 
47.5% 
 
34.2% 
Ferritin >2500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46.65% 
 
52.5% 
 
53.9% 
Ferritin mean 
 
 
 
 
3300 
1104 (120-
8553) 
2250±2313 
 
2383 
 
 
3339 
Cardiac T2*>20 
 
77.7% 
82.7% 
 
70.5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiac T2*10-19 
 
11.8% 
11.4% 
 
23.5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cardiac T2* <9 
 
 
5.9% 
 
5% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIC <3 
 
 
13.4% 
 
32% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIC 3-7 
 
 
20.6% 
 
14.6% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIC 7-15 
 
32.9% 
29% 
 
10.1% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIC >15 
 
 
37% 
 
2.9% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
389 
Comments on the burden of disease 
Even in high resource countries, traditionally offering optimal care, such as Italy, in a recent report 85% of 
patients suffer from one or more comorbidities; the most frequently reported comorbidities are osteoporosis 
(74.28%) and endocrine problems (54.28%), fertility issues in 40.95% and dental problems reported in 27.62%. 
Also, there are significantly reduced levels of HRQoL compared with the general population, influencing 
physical and social activities. Patients’ perceived a high burden of disease, with fear of adverse events from 
treatment as well as the disease [187]. Very similar findings are reported from other clinical and social settings; 
one example being a study of patients from Malaysia [188].  
Patients’ quality of life can be severely affected by issues such as bone pain and leg ulcers which may not be life 
threatening. This particularly true of the ‘milder’ thalassaemia syndromes. In a report from Sri Lanka a new leg 
ulcer was recorded in 45 (22.2%) of 196 patients with HbE thalassemia, most irregularly transfused and with a 
steady state haemoglobin of 6.4 ± 0.2 g/dL. [189]. In Thailand from a total of 459 NTDT (87.6%) and 65 TDT 
(12.4%) adult patients, osteopenia/osteoporosis was detected in 69.8%, gallstones (67.6%), and abnormal 
vitamin D levels in 67.6%. These predispose to pain and an effect on the quality of life [190]. 
 
CONCLUSION 
There is a considerable gap in published information on patient numbers, nationwide survival, morbidity and 
mortality rates that would support the better assessment of the level of contribution of thalassaemia to the 
national disease burden. 
Such an assessment would help decisions to be made and appropriate budget allocations. It would support 
disease prioritization and development and/or strengthening of disease specific policies at the national level. 
Our findings, albeit incomplete and on occasions grossly estimated, suggest that these disorders contribute 
significantly to the country’s disease burden and that many and multiple efforts are needed by competent 
authorities to alleviate the pain and suffering and the premature death of patients with these disorders. 
 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
390 
REFERENCES 
1. 
WHO 
QUALITY 
OF 
CARE: 
HTTPS://WWW.WHO.INT/HEALTH-
TOPICS/QUALITY-OF-
CARE#TAB=TAB_1 
 
2. WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT 1993: 
INVESTING 
IN 
HEALTH. 
HTTPS://OPENKNOWLEDGE.WORLDBA
NK.ORG/HANDLE/10986/5976 
 
3. 
MURRAY 
CJL. 
QUANTIFYING 
THE 
BURDEN OF DISEASE: THE TECHNICAL 
BASIS FOR DISABILITY-ADJUSTED LIFE 
YEARS. BULL WORLD HEALTH ORG. 
1994. 72(3): 429-445 
 
4. THACKER SB, STROUP DF, CARANDE-
KULIS 
V, 
MARKS 
JS, 
ROY 
K, 
GERBERDING 
JL. 
MEASURING THE 
PUBLIC'S HEALTH. PUBLIC HEALTH REP. 
2006 
JAN-FEB;121(1):14-22. 
DOI: 
10.1177/003335490612100107. 
PMID: 
16416694. 
 
5. SOTERIADES S, ANGASTINIOTIS M, 
FARMAKIS D, ELEFTHERIOU A, MAGGIO 
A. THE NEED FOR TRANSLATIONAL 
EPIDEMIOLOGY IN BETA THALASSEMIA 
SYNDROMES: 
A 
THALASSEMIA 
INTERNATIONAL 
FEDERATION 
PERSPECTIVE. HEMATOL ONCOL CLIN 
NORTH AM. 2023 APR;37(2):261-272. DOI: 
10.1016/J.HOC.2022.12.011. 
 
6. PARAMORE C, LEVINE L, BAGSHAW E, 
OUYANG C, KUDLAC A, LARKIN M. 
PATIENT- AND CAREGIVER-REPORTED 
BURDEN 
OF 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT 
Β-THALASSEMIA 
MEASURED 
USING 
A 
DIGITAL 
APPLICATION. PATIENT. 2020 OCT 30. 
DOI: 10.1007/S40271-020-00473-0. PMID: 
33123986. 
 
7. 
BETTS M, FLIGHT PA, PARAMORE LC, 
TIAN L, MILENKOVIĆ D, SHETH S. 
SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW OF 
THE 
BURDEN 
OF 
DISEASE 
AND 
TREATMENT 
FOR 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT 
Β-THALASSEMIA. CLIN 
THER. 2020 FEB;42(2):322-337.E2. DOI: 
10.1016/J.CLINTHERA.2019.12.003. 
PMID: 31882227. 
 
8. GBD 2019 DISEASES AND INJURIES 
COLLABORATORS. GLOBAL BURDEN OF 
369 DISEASES AND INJURIES IN 204 
COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES, 1990–
2019: A SYSTEMATIC ANALYSIS FOR THE 
GLOBAL BURDEN OF DISEASE STUDY 
2019. THE LANCET. 2020; 396(10258): 
1204-1222. 
DOI.ORG/10.1016/S0140-
6736(20)30925-9 
 
9. KASSEBAUM 
NJ, 
WEATHERALL 
D, 
NAGHAVI 
M, 
MURRAY 
CJL. 
A 
SYSTEMATIC GLOBAL ANALYSIS OF 
DEATH 
AND 
DISABILITY 
DUE TO 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
AND 
HAEMOLYTIC 
ANAEMIAS 
BETWEEN 
1990 AND 2010. THE LANCET. 2013. 
381(SUPPLEMENT 
2): 
S73. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1016/S0140-
6736(13)61327-6 
 
10. KOUNTOURIS 
P, 
MICHAILIDOU 
K, 
CHRISTOU 
S, 
HADJIGAVRIEL 
M, 
SITAROU 
M, 
KOLNAGOU 
A, 
KLEANTHOUS M, TELFER P. EFFECT OF 
HBB GENOTYPE ON SURVIVAL IN A 
COHORT 
OF 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS 
IN CYPRUS. HAEMATOLOGICA. 2021 SEP 
1;106(9):2458-2468. 
DOI: 
10.3324/HAEMATOL.2020.260224. 
 
11. TANTIWORAWIT A, KAMOLSRIPAT T, 
PIRIYAKHUNTORN 
P, 
RATTANATHAMMETHEE 
T, 
HANTRAKOOL S, CHAI-ADISAKSOPHA 
C, 
RATTARITTAMRONG 
E, 
NORASETTHADA L, FANHCHAKSAI K, 
CHAROENKWAN 
P. SURVIVAL AND 
CAUSES OF DEATH IN PATIENTS WITH 
ALPHA AND BETA-THALASSEMIA IN 
NORTHERN THAILAND. ANN MED. 2024 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
391 
DEC;56(1):2338246. 
DOI: 
10.1080/07853890.2024.2338246. 
 
12. BELLIZZI 
S, 
AIDYRALIEVA 
C, 
ALSAWHALA L, AL-SHAIKH A, SANTORO 
A, PROFILI MC. VACCINATION FOR 
SARS-COV-2 
OF 
MIGRANTS 
AND 
REFUGEES, JORDAN. BULL WORLD 
HEALTH ORGAN. 2021 SEP 1;99(9):611. 
DOI:10.2471/BLT.21.285591 
 
13. HASAN D, AL TIBI A, BURGHEL G, 
ABDELNOUR A. DETERMINING THE 
CURRENT 
PREVALENCE 
OF 
Β-
THALASSEMIA VARIANTS IN JORDAN. 
ARCH MED SCI. 2023 MAR 10;19(2):523-
527. DOI: 10.5114/AOMS/161096. 
 
14. KOSARYAN M, KARAMI H, DARVISHI-
KHEZRI 
H, 
AKBARZADEH 
R, 
ALIASGHARIAN 
A, 
BROMAND 
K. 
TREATMENT STATUS OF PATIENTS 
WITH 
B-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
NORTHERN 
IRAN: 
THALASSEMIA 
REGISTRY SYSTEM. IRAN J PUBLIC 
HEALTH. 2019; 48(7):1335-1345. PMID: 
31497556. 
 
15. QADERI S, MOUSAVI SH, AHMADI A, 
ARIF S, MADADI S, AYOUBI S, LUCERO-
PRISNO 
DE 
3RD. 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT BETA THALASSEMIA IN 
AFGHANISTAN: CURRENT EVIDENCE 
AMID 
COVID-19 
AND 
FUTURE 
RECOMMENDATIONS. 
HEMATOLOGY. 
2021 
DEC;26(1):432-434. 
DOI: 
10.1080/16078454.2021.1938814 
 
16. BAHRAM S, HAJI A, ABDULWAHAB H, 
MOHSEN H, ALNASHABA T, AL-ARADI Z, 
MANDEEL 
M. 
OUTCOME 
OF 
PREMARITAL GENETIC COUNSELING 
FOR 
COUPLES 
AT 
RISK 
OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN KINGDOM 
OF BAHRAIN. J MED SCREEN. 2023 
DEC;30(4):161-167. 
DOI: 
10.1177/09691413231169820. 
 
17. AL SAIF K, ABDULLA FM, ALRAHIM A, 
ABDULJAWAD 
S, 
MATROOK 
Z, 
ABDULLA JJ, BUGHAMAR F, ALASFOOR 
F, TAQI R, ALMARZOOQ A, AHMED J. 
CAREGIVERS' EXPERIENCE OF SEEKING 
CARE FOR ADOLESCENTS WITH SICKLE 
CELL DISEASE IN A TERTIARY CARE 
HOSPITAL IN BAHRAIN. PLOS ONE. 2022 
APR 
7;17(4):E0266501. 
DOI: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0266501 
 
18. IBRAHIM AS, ABD EL-FATAH AH, ABD EL-
HALIM AF, MOHAMED FF. SERUM 
FERRITIN 
LEVELS 
AND 
OTHER 
ASSOCIATED 
PARAMETERS 
WITH 
DIABETES 
MELLITUS 
IN 
ADULT 
PATIENTS SUFFERING 
FROM 
BETA 
THALASSEMIA MAJOR. J BLOOD MED. 
2023 
FEB 
7;14:67-81. 
DOI: 
10.2147/JBM.S390666. 
 
19. TANTAWY AAG, ELSHERIF NHK, HABEEB 
NM, HASAN EM, ABDELHAMEED AE. A 
TWO-DIMENSIONAL 
SPECKLE-
TRACKING ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY FOR 
THE 
DIAGNOSIS 
OF 
EARLY 
MYOCARDIAL 
DISEASE 
IN 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA MAJOR PATIENTS. ANN 
PEDIATR 
CARDIOL. 
2022 
MAY-
JUN;15(3):257-265. 
DOI: 
10.4103/APC.APC_91_21. 
 
20. MAHMOUD RA, KHODEARY A, FARHAN 
MS. 
DETECTION 
OF 
ENDOCRINE 
DISORDERS IN YOUNG CHILDREN WITH 
MULTI-TRANSFUSED 
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR. ITAL J PEDIATR. 2021 JUL 
31;47(1):165. DOI: 10.1186/S13052-021-
01116-2. 
 
21. BORDBAR M, BOZORGI H, SAKI F, 
HAGHPANAH 
S, 
KARIMI 
M, 
BAZRAFSHAN 
A, 
ZEKAVAT 
OR. 
PREVALENCE 
OF 
ENDOCRINE 
DISORDERS AND THEIR ASSOCIATED 
FACTORS 
IN 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS: 
A HISTORICAL COHORT STUDY IN 
SOUTHERN 
IRAN. 
J 
ENDOCRINOL 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
392 
INVEST. 2019 DEC;42(12):1467-1476. DOI: 
10.1007/S40618-019-01072-Z 
 
22. ANSARI-MOGHADDAM A, ADINEH HA, 
ZAREBAN 
I, 
MOHAMMADI 
M, 
MAGHSOODLU M. THE SURVIVAL RATE 
OF PATIENTS WITH BETA-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR AND INTERMEDIA AND ITS 
TRENDS IN RECENT YEARS IN IRAN. 
EPIDEMIOL HEALTH. 2018;40:E2018048. 
DOI: 10.4178/EPIH.E2018048. 
 
23. KHODASHENAS 
M, 
MARDI 
P, 
TAHERZADEH-GHAHFAROKHI 
N, 
TAVAKOLI-FAR B, JAMEE M, GHODRATI 
N. QUALITY OF LIFE AND RELATED 
PARACLINICAL FACTORS IN IRANIAN 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA. J ENVIRON 
PUBLIC 
HEALTH. 
2021 
AUG 
18;2021:2849163. 
DOI: 
10.1155/2021/2849163 
 
24. ESMAEILZADEH F, AHMADI B, VAHEDI S, 
BARZEGARI 
S, 
RAJABI 
A. 
MAJOR 
THALASSEMIA, 
SCREENING 
OR 
TREATMENT: 
AN 
ECONOMIC 
EVALUATION STUDY IN IRAN. INT J 
HEALTH POLICY MANAG. 2022 JUL 
1;11(7):1112-1119. 
DOI: 
10.34172/IJHPM.2021.04. 
 
25. SADULLAH RK, ATROSHI SD, AL-ALLAWI 
NA. 
COMPLICATIONS 
AND 
CHALLENGES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF 
IRAQI PATIENTS WITH Β-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR: 
A 
SINGLE-CENTER 
EXPERIENCE. OMAN MED J. 2020 JUL 
27;35(4):E152. DOI: 10.5001/OMJ.2020.72. 
 
26. ALKINANI ABBAS ALI A, MUNA F,  FARAJ 
S, JUMAA RM. AN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL 
STUDY OF THALASSAEMIA PATIENTS 
ATTENDING THALASSAEMIC CENTER IN 
WASSIT. 
WORLD 
JOURNAL 
OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH 6(10):1-
12, DOI:10.20959/WJPR201710-8949 
 
27. AMIN S, JALAL S, ALI K, RASOOL L, 
OSMAN 
T, 
ALI 
O, 
M-SAEED 
A. 
MOLECULAR CHARACTERIZATION AND 
DISEASE-RELATED MORBIDITIES OF Β-
THALASSEMIA PATIENTS FROM THE 
NORTHEASTERN PART OF IRAQ. INT J 
GEN MED. 2020 DEC 9;13:1453-1467. DOI: 
10.2147/IJGM.S277947 
 
28. ABU SHOSHA GM, AL-KALALDEH M, 
SHOQIRAT N. NURSES' EXPERIENCES 
OF PSYCHOSOCIAL CARE NEEDS OF 
CHILDREN WITH THALASSAEMIA AND 
THEIR 
FAMILIES 
IN 
JORDAN: 
A 
PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY. NURS 
OPEN. 2022 NOV;9(6):2858-2866. DOI: 
10.1002/NOP2.992 
 
29. HASAN D, AL TIBI A, BURGHEL G, 
ABDELNOUR A. DETERMINING THE 
CURRENT 
PREVALENCE 
OF 
Β-
THALASSEMIA VARIANTS IN JORDAN. 
ARCH MED SCI. 2023 MAR 10;19(2):523-
527. DOI: 10.5114/AOMS/161096 
 
30. ALABBADI, I. ., MASSAD, E. ., TAANI , N. 
., DABABNEH , S. ., SHERSHEER , Q. ., 
NIMRI , O. ., MAHMOUD, R. ., HIJAZEEN, 
R. ., & ISHAQ, A. . (2022). EXPLORING THE 
ECONOMIC 
ASPECTS 
OF 
Β-
THALASSEMIA IN JORDAN IN 2019. 
JORDAN 
JOURNAL 
OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL 
SCIENCES, 
15(3), 
390–404. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.35516/JJPS.V15I3.4
12 
 
31. BOU-FAKHREDIN 
R, 
GHANEM 
NN, 
KREIDIEH F, TABBIKHA R, DAADAA H, 
AJOUZ J, KOUSSA S, TAHER AT. A 
REPORT 
ON 
THE 
EDUCATION, 
EMPLOYMENT AND MARITAL STATUS 
OF THALASSEMIA PATIENTS FROM A 
TERTIARY CARE CENTER IN THE MIDDLE 
EAST. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2020 
JUL;44(4):278-283. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2020.1797776 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
393 
32. KHAN H., PANJWANI V., AL RAHBI S., 
ELTIGANI A., QURESHI R.N., UNISSA K., 
SEHAR N., MITTAL A., PATHARE A.V. 
CORRELATION 
OF 
TRANSIENT 
ELASTOGRAPHY WITH LIVER IRON 
CONCENTRATION 
AND 
SERUM 
FERRITIN LEVELS IN PATIENTS WITH 
TRANSFUSION-DEPENDENT 
THALASSEMIA MAJOR FROM OMAN. 
MEDITERR J HEMATOL INFECT DIS 2023, 
15(1): 
E2023048, 
DOI: 
HTTP://DX.DOI.ORG/10.4084/MJHID.202
3.048 
 
33. DAAR S, AL-NAAMANI K, DE SANCTIS V, 
AL RAHBI S, AL ZADJALI S, KHAN H, 
PANJWANI 
V, 
AL-KHABORI 
M. 
MORTALITY AND COMPLICATIONS IN 
OMANI 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA MAJOR: A LONG-TERM 
FOLLOW-UP STUDY. ACTA BIOMED. 
2023 
AUG 
3;94(4):E2023191. 
DOI: 
10.23750/ABM.V94I5.14856. 
 
34. AL-RUSHAIDI A, AL-HINAI S, AL-SUMRI 
H. HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 
OF OMANI ADULT PATIENTS WITH Β-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
AT 
SULTAN 
QABOOS 
UNIVERSITY 
HOSPITAL. 
OMAN MED J. 2024 MAR 31;39(2):E613. 
DOI: 10.5001/OMJ.2024.62. 
 
35. AL ZEEDI MASA, AL ABRI ZG. ATTITUDES 
AND IMPACT AMONG PEOPLE WITH 
ABNORMAL PREMARITAL SCREENING 
TEST 
RESULTS 
IN 
MUSCAT 
GOVERNORATE'S 
PRIMARY 
HEALTHCARE CENTERS IN 2018. J 
COMMUNITY 
GENET. 
2021 
JAN;12(1):163-169. DOI: 10.1007/S12687-
020-00493-1 
 
36. REHMAN IU, KHAN TM, BUKHSH A, 
MUNAWAR K, SULEIMAN AK, MING LC, 
CHOOI WH, AL-WORAFI YM, TAHIR H, 
CHOUDHRY 
FR. 
CHALLENGES 
OF 
HAVING A CHILD WITH THALASSEMIA IN 
PAKISTAN: A 
PHENOMENOLOGICAL 
STUDY. J PEDIATR NURS. 2023 SEP-
OCT;72:E179-E186. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.PEDN.2023.06.026 
 
37. WASEEM S, AHMED SH, SHAIKH TG, 
MEHEDI HASSAN M. THE BATTLE 
AGAINST THALASSEMIA IN PAKISTAN: 
WAY TO MOVE FORWARD. TRANSFUS 
CLIN BIOL. 2023 MAY;30(2):177-178. DOI: 
10.1016/J.TRACLI.2022.11.003. 
 
38. KHALIQ S. THALASSEMIA IN PAKISTAN. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2022 JAN;46(1):12-14. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2059670. 
 
39. QAMAR MK, SHAIKH BT. OUT OF 
POCKET 
EXPENDITURE 
ON 
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
AND 
ITS 
IMPLICATIONS ON THE HOUSEHOLD 
ECONOMICS. 
J 
AYUB 
MED 
COLL 
ABBOTTABAD 2022;34(1):91–4 
 
40. BAKAR 
BHURA 
SA, 
KHAN 
WB. 
ADDRESSING 
THE 
THALASSEMIA 
BURDEN IN PAKISTAN: THE URGENT 
NEED 
FOR 
A 
MANDATE 
ON 
PREMARITAL SCREENING. J PAK MED 
ASSOC. 
2024 
AUG;74(8):1578. 
DOI: 
10.47391/JPMA.11100 
 
41. KOHLBRY P, AL-KARMI B, YAMASHITA R. 
QUALITY-OF-LIFE OF PATIENTS LIVING 
WITH THALASSAEMIA IN THE WEST 
BANK AND GAZA. EAST MEDITERR 
HEALTH J. 2023 JUN 27;29(6):425-435. 
DOI: 10.26719/EMHJ.23.045 
 
42. ALDWAIK R, ABU MOHOR T, IDYABI I, 
WARASNA S, ABDEEN S, KARMI B, ABU 
SEIR R. HEALTH STATUS OF PATIENTS 
WITH Β-THALASSEMIA IN THE WEST 
BANK: 
A 
RETROSPECTIVE-COHORT 
STUDY. FRONT MED (LAUSANNE). 2021 
DEC 
20;8:788758. 
DOI: 
10.3389/FMED.2021.788758. 
 
43. KANBOUR I, CHANDRA P, SOLIMAN A, 
DE 
SANCTIS 
V, 
NASHWAN 
A, 
ABUSAMAAN S, MOUSTAFA A, YASSIN 
MA. 
SEVERE 
LIVER 
IRON 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
394 
CONCENTRATIONS (LIC) IN 24 PATIENTS 
WITH 
Β-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR: 
CORRELATIONS WITH SERUM FERRITIN, 
LIVER 
ENZYMES AND 
ENDOCRINE 
COMPLICATIONS. 
MEDITERR 
J 
HEMATOL INFECT DIS. 2018 NOV 
1;10(1):E2018062. 
DOI: 
10.4084/MJHID.2018.062. 
 
44. ALBAGSHI MH, SAAD M, ALJASSEM AM, 
BUSHEHAB AA, AHMED NH, ALABBAD 
MM, OMER N, ALHAMAD OA, SULTAN 
TA, BAHGAT S. BLOOD DEMAND AND 
CHALLENGES FOR PATIENTS WITH 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA. CUREUS. 2021 
AUG 
26;13(8):E17470. 
DOI: 
10.7759/CUREUS.17470 
 
45. TOUMA H, YOUSSEF LA, AL-SALHI L, 
ISMAIL AL-KHALIL W, ALKEBA 
K. 
PREVALENCE AND MANAGEMENT OF 
TRANSFUSIONAL IRON OVERLOAD IN 
SYRIAN BETA THALASSEMIA MAJOR 
PATIENTS 
PRE AND 
DURING THE 
SYRIAN CONFLICT. BIOMED RES INT. 
2023 
SEP 
14;2023:8911518. 
DOI: 
10.1155/2023/8911518 
 
46. KURBAN LA, ALMARRI BK, ALSHAMSI 
MH, ABDELRAHMAN SS, ALWAHSHI SG, 
ALHORANI Q, SYED R, BAKOUSH O. 
OPTIMIZED 
SERUM 
FERRITIN 
PREDICTION OF IRON OVERLOAD IN 
TRANSFUSION-DEPENDENT 
THALASSEMIA: 
LIKELIHOOD 
RATIO 
AND AGE-ADJUSTMENT APPROACH. 
ANN 
SAUDI 
MED. 
2023 
MAR-
APR;43(2):90-96. 
DOI: 
10.5144/0256-
4947.2023.90. 
 
47. ALSHAMSI S, HAMIDI S, NARCI HO. 
HEALTHCARE RESOURCE UTILIZATION 
AND DIRECT COSTS OF TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS 
IN DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: A 
RETROSPECTIVE 
COST-OF-ILLNESS 
STUDY. BMC HEALTH SERV RES. 2022 
MAR 5;22(1):304. DOI: 10.1186/S12913-
022-07663-6. 
 
48. KHAN WA, BANU B, SADIYA S, ET AL. 
SPECTRUM 
OF 
TYPES 
OF 
THALASSEMIAS 
AND 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES: STUDY IN A 
TERTIARY LEVEL CHILDREN HOSPITAL 
IN 
BANGLADESH. 
THALASSAEMIA 
REPORTS. 2017;7(1):18–20 
 
49. CHOWDHURY MA, SULTANA R, DAS D. 
THALASSEMIA IN ASIA 2021 OVERVIEW 
OF 
THALASSEMIA 
AND 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
IN 
BANGLADESH. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):7-9. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2008957 
 
50. MITRO, A.; HOSSAIN, D.; RAHMAN, 
M.M.; 
DAM, 
B.; 
HOSEN, 
M.J. 
Β-
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
BANGLADESH: 
CURRENT 
STATUS 
AND 
FUTURE 
PERSPECTIVES. THALASS. REP. 2024, 14, 
49-59. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.3390/THALASSREP
14030007 
 
51. HOSSAIN MJ, ISLAM MW, MUNNI UR, 
GULSHAN R, MUKTA SA, MIAH MS, 
SULTANA S, KARMAKAR M, FERDOUS J, 
ISLAM MA. HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY 
OF 
LIFE 
AMONG 
THALASSEMIA 
PATIENTS IN BANGLADESH USING THE 
SF-36 QUESTIONNAIRE. SCI REP. 2023 
MAY 12;13(1):7734. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-
023-34205-9 
 
52. SINGH P, SHAIKH S, PARMAR S, GUPTA R. 
CURRENT STATUS OF Β-THALASSEMIC 
BURDEN IN INDIA. HEMOGLOBIN. 2023 
NOV 
10:1-10. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2023.2269837 
 
53. SUMEDHA D, ANITA K. PREVALENCE OF 
BETA 
THALASSEMIA 
CARRIERS 
IN 
INDIA: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND 
META-ANALYSIS. J COMMUNITY GENET. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
395 
2023 OCT 20. DOI: 10.1007/S12687-023-
00683-7 
 
54. SINHA S, SETH T, COLAH RB, BITTLES 
AH. HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN INDIA: 
ESTIMATES OF BLOOD REQUIREMENTS 
AND TREATMENT COSTS FOR THE 
DECADE 
2017-2026. J COMMUNITY 
GENET. 
2020 
JAN;11(1):39-45. 
DOI: 
10.1007/S12687-019-00410-1 
 
55. UCHIL A, MURANJAN M, GOGTAY NJ. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSAEMIA 
MAJOR 
RECEIVING 
HYPERTRANSFUSION THERAPY AT A 
PUBLIC HOSPITAL IN MUMBAI. NATL 
MED J INDIA. 2023 JAN-FEB;36(1):11-16. 
DOI: 10.25259/NMJI_580_20 
 
56. SAHU S, AGRAWAL A, SHRIVASTAVA J, 
TONK S. PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS AND 
CAREGIVER BURDEN IN CHILDREN WITH 
TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
Β-
THALASSAEMIA 
AND 
THEIR 
CAREGIVERS. WORLD J CLIN PEDIATR. 
2023 
JUN 
9;12(3):125-132. 
DOI: 
10.5409/WJCP.V12.I3.125 
 
57. BISWAS B, NASKAR NN, BASU K, 
DASGUPTA A, BASU R, PAUL B. AN 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE 
QUALITY OF LIFE OF CHILDREN WITH 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
(Β-TM) 
AND ITS CORRELATES IN KOLKATA, 
WEST BENGAL, INDIA. CUREUS. 2023 
MAR 
29;15(3):E36888. 
DOI: 
10.7759/CUREUS.36888 
 
58. BISWAS B, NASKAR NN, BASU K, 
DASGUPTA A, 
BASU R, PAUL B. 
TRANSFUSION-TRANSMITTED 
INFECTIONS, ITS RISK FACTORS AND 
IMPACT ON QUALITY OF LIFE: AN 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDY AMONG Β-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
CHILDREN. 
ASIAN J TRANSFUS SCI. 2022 JAN-
JUN;16(1):99-105. 
DOI: 
10.4103/AJTS.AJTS_74_18 
 
59. BISWAS B, NASKAR NN, BASU K, 
DASGUPTA A, BASU R, PAUL B. 
MALNUTRITION, ITS ATTRIBUTES AND 
IMPACT ON QUALITY OF LIFE: AN 
EPIDEMIOGICAL STUDY AMONG B-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
CHILDREN. 
KOREAN J FAM MED. 2021 JAN;42(1): 66-
72 DOI: 10.4082/KJFM.19.0066 
 
60. RADHAKRISHNAN 
N, 
CHANDRA 
J, 
MANGLANI M, TREHAN A ET AL SURVEY 
TO ASSESS THE QUALITY OF SERVICES 
FOR THALASSAEMIA DIAGNOSIS AND 
MANAGEMENT IN INDIA. ABSTRACT AT 
THE 
2023 
TIF 
INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCE 
KUALA 
LUMPUR, 
NOVEMBER 2023 
 
61. CHINNAIYAN 
S, 
SYLVIA 
J, 
KOTHANDARAMAN S, PALANISAMY B. 
QUALITY OF LIFE AND THALASSEMIA IN 
INDIA: A SCOPING REVIEW. J FAMILY 
MED PRIM CARE. 2024 APR;13(4):1183-
1190. 
DOI: 
10.4103/JFMPC.JFMPC_1787_23. 
 
62. YADAV SS, PANCHAL P, MENON KC. 
PREVALENCE AND MANAGEMENT OF Β-
THALASSEMIA IN INDIA. HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):27-32. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2001346 
 
63. WAHIDIYAT 
PA, 
ISKANDAR 
SD, 
SEKARSARI D. EVALUATION OF IRON 
OVERLOAD BETWEEN AGE GROUPS 
USING 
MAGNETIC 
RESONANCE 
IMAGING AND ITS CORRELATION WITH 
IRON 
PROFILE 
IN 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA. ACTA MED 
INDONES. 2018 JUL;50(3):230-236. PMID: 
30333273. 
 
64. FIANZA PI, RAHMAWATI A, WIDIHASTHA 
SH, AFIFAH S, GHOZALI M, INDRAJAYA 
A, PRATAMA DMA, PRASETYA D, SIHITE 
TA, SYAMSUNARNO MRAA, SETIABUDI 
D, FUCHAROEN S, PANIGORO R. IRON 
OVERLOAD 
IN 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT 
INDONESIAN 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
396 
THALASSEMIC PATIENTS. ANEMIA. 2021 
APR 
15;2021:5581831. 
DOI: 
10.1155/2021/5581831 
 
65. DJER MM, ANGGRIAWAN SL, GATOT D, 
AMALIA P, SASTROASMORO S, WIDJAJA 
P. 
CORRELATION 
BETWEEN 
T2* 
CARDIOVASCULAR 
MAGNETIC 
RESONANCE WITH LEFT VENTRICULAR 
FUNCTION AND MASS IN ADOLESCENT 
AND ADULT MAJOR THALASSEMIA 
PATIENTS WITH IRON OVERLOAD. ACTA 
MED INDONES. 2013 OCT;45(4):295-301 
 
66. MARHAENI W, FELICIA FV, SUMADI JAP 
AL, 
HARTOYO 
E, 
ANDAYANI 
P. 
COMPARING SERUM FERRITIN LEVELS 
DURING COVID-19 INFECTION AND 
RECOVERY 
PERIOD 
IN 
PEDIATRIC 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA, A SINGLE-
CENTER 
STUDY. 
FRONT 
MED 
(LAUSANNE). 2023 FEB 9;10:1056599. 
DOI: 10.3389/FMED.2023.1056599 
 
67. ATMAKUSUMA 
TD, 
KALWANI 
R, 
NASUTION 
SA, 
RUMENDE 
CM. 
CORRELATION OF SERUM FERRITIN 
AND CARDIAC IRON TOXICITY WITH 
CARDIAC FUNCTION IN TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR PATIENTS. ACTA MED INDONES. 
2021 JUL;53(3):291-298 
 
68. WAHIDIYAT PA, SARI TT, RAHMARTANI 
LD, ISKANDAR SD, PRATANATA AM, 
YAPIY I, SETIANINGSIH I, ATMAKUSUMA 
TD, 
LUBIS 
AM. THALASSEMIA 
IN 
INDONESIA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):39-44. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2023565 
 
69. SARI TT, WAHIDIYAT PA, RAHMARTANI 
LD, 
ISKANDAR 
SD, 
PUTRI 
IA. 
COMPARISON 
OF 
YEARLY 
COST 
RELATED 
TO 
COMPLICATIONS 
BETWEEN 
DEFERASIROX 
AND 
DEFERIPRONE 
MONOTHERAPY 
IN 
THALASSEMIA. J PEDIATR HEMATOL 
ONCOL. 2024 AUG 1;46(6):E402-E405. 
DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000002894. 
 
70. FIRDOUS N, GIBBONS S, MODELL B. 
FALLING 
PREVALENCE 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSAEMIA AND ERADICATION OF 
MALARIA 
IN 
THE 
MALDIVES. 
J 
COMMUNITY GENET 2011; 2(3): 173-89 
 
71. ANGASTINIOTIS M. THE MALDIVES: 
WHO 
MISSION 
AUGUST 
2014. 
THALASSAEMIA 
INTERNATIONAL 
FEDERATION, NICOSIA. 2014 
 
72. MUSTAFA I, FIRDOUS N, SHEBL FM, SHI 
Z, SAEED M, ZAHIR Z, ZAYED H. GENETIC 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA IN THE MALDIVES: 23 
YEARS 
OF 
A 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
SCREENING PROGRAM. GENE. 2020 
MAY 
30;741:144544. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.GENE.2020.144544. 
 
73. MANSOOR, S., OTHMAN, Z., OTHMAN, 
A., & HUSAIN, M. (2018). A DESCRIPTIVE 
STUDY ON QUALITY OF LIFE AMONG 
ADOLESCENTS 
WITH 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
THE 
MALDIVES. INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL 
JOURNAL, 25(4), 211-214 
 
74. KHAING 
AA, 
MYINT 
PP, 
PAIBOONSUKWONG 
K, 
WIN 
N, 
FUCHAROEN S, SRIPICHAI O. CLINICAL 
SEVERITY 
OF 
Β-THALASSEMIA 
PEDIATRIC PATIENTS IN MYANMAR. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2022 JAN;46(1):66-70. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2025825 
 
75. SHRESTHA RM, PANDIT R, YADAV UK, 
DAS 
R, YADAV 
BK, 
UPRETI 
HC. 
DISTRIBUTION 
OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHY IN NEPALESE 
POPULATION. J NEPAL HEALTH RES 
COUNC. 2020 APR 20;18(1):52-58. DOI: 
10.33314/JNHRC.V18I1.2303 
 
76. ADHIKARI 
P. 
ADDRESSING 
COMPLEXITIES 
IN 
Β-THALASSEMIA 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
397 
CARE: 
A 
CASE 
SERIES 
FROM 
A 
RESOURCE-LIMITED 
SETTING. 
ANN 
MED 
SURG 
(LOND). 
2024 
AUG 
14;86(9):4979-4983. 
DOI: 
10.1097/MS9.0000000000002471 
 
77. SHARMA POUDYAL B, DEVKOTA A, 
KOUIDES P. THALASSEMIA CARE IN 
NEPAL: 
IN 
DIRE 
NEED 
OF 
IMPROVEMENT. EJHAEM. 2023 MAR 
20;4(2):548-550. DOI: 10.1002/JHA2.681. 
 
78. TIWARI D, GUPTA SK, THAPA NB, 
DEVKOTA K. HIGH SERUM FERRITIN 
LEVELS AMONG BLOOD TRANSFUSED 
THALASSEMIC PATIENTS ADMITTED TO 
THE DEPARTMENT OF PAEDIATRICS IN A 
TERTIARY 
CARE 
CENTRE: 
A 
DESCRIPTIVE 
CROSS-SECTIONAL 
STUDY. JNMA J NEPAL MED ASSOC. 2023 
JUN 
1;61(262):543-545. 
DOI: 
10.31729/JNMA.8195 
 
79. METTANANDA S, PATHIRAJA H, PEIRIS 
R, WICKRAMARATHNE N, BANDARA D, 
DE 
SILVA 
U, 
METTANANDA 
C, 
PREMAWARDHENA 
A. 
BLOOD 
TRANSFUSION 
THERAPY 
FOR 
Β-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
AND 
HEMOGLOBIN 
E 
Β-THALASSEMIA: 
ADEQUACY, 
TRENDS, 
AND 
DETERMINANTS IN SRI LANKA. PEDIATR 
BLOOD 
CANCER. 
2019 
MAY;66(5):E27643. 
DOI: 
10.1002/PBC.27643 
 
80. PREMAWARDHANA AP, MUDIYANSE R, 
DE SILVA ST, JIFFRY N, NELUMDENIYA U, 
DE SILVA U, LAMABADUSURIYA SP, 
PUSHPAKUMARA K, DISSANAYAKA R, 
JANSZ M, RIFAYA I, NAVARATHNE U, 
THIRUKUMARAN V, ARAMBEPOLA M, 
DAYANADA 
BANDARA 
W, 
VAIDYANATHA 
U, 
MENDIS 
D, 
WEERASEKARA 
K, 
DE 
SILVA 
N, 
SHANTHA KUMARA DK, AMARASENA 
SD, HEMANTHA KK, REFAI MACM, SILVA 
I, HAMEED N, RAJIYAH F, METTANANDA 
S, ALLEN A, WEATHERALL DJ, OLIVERI 
NF. 
A 
NATIONWIDE 
SURVEY 
OF 
HOSPITAL-BASED 
THALASSEMIA 
PATIENTS AND STANDARDS OF CARE 
AND A PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF 
THE 
NATIONAL 
PREVENTION 
PROGRAM IN SRI LANKA. PLOS ONE. 
2019 
AUG 
16;14(8):E0220852. 
DOI: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0220852 
 
81. ANULAWATHIE 
MENIKE, 
H.R. AND 
WIJESINGHE, P.C. 2018. “SURVIVAL OF 
MEDICALLY 
TREATED 
BETA 
THALASSAEMIA 
PATIENTS 
IN 
SRI 
LANKA (2000 – 2017)”, INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL 
OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
RESEARCH, 8, (04), 19963-19967 
 
82. PREMAWARDHENA AP, MADUSHANKA 
HDP. THALASSEMIA IN SRI LANKA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):71-73. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2025826 
 
83. PREMAWARDHENA AP, EDIRIWEERA DS, 
SABOUHANIAN A, ALLEN A, ET AL. 
SURVIVAL AND COMPLICATIONS IN 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
HAEMOGLOBIN 
E 
THALASSAEMIA IN SRI 
LANKA: A 
PROSPECTIVE, 
LONGITUDINAL 
COHORT 
STUDY. 
LANCET 
GLOB 
HEALTH. 2022 JAN;10(1):E134-E141. DOI: 
10.1016/S2214-109X(21)00446-0. 
 
84. ANULAWATHIE 
MENIKE, 
H.R. AND 
WIJESINGHE, P.C. 2018. “SURVIVAL OF 
MEDICALLY 
TREATED 
BETA 
THALASSAEMIA 
PATIENTS 
IN 
SRI 
LANKA (2000 – 2017)”, INTERNATIONAL 
JOURNAL 
OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
RESEARCH, 8, (04), 19963-19967 
 
85. NANAYAKKARA 
KK, 
RODRIGO UG, 
PERERA KLN, NANAYAKKARA CD. PRE-
NATAL DIAGNOSIS OF THALASSAEMIA 
IN SRI LANKA: A TEN YEAR REVIEW. J 
OBSTET GYNAECOL. 2017 OCT;37(7):861-
863. DOI: 10.1080/01443615.2017.1306841 
 
86. REED-EMBLETON H, ARAMBEPOLA S, 
DIXON 
S, 
MALDONADO 
BN, 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
398 
PREMAWARDHENA A, ARAMBEPOLA M, 
KHAN JAM, ALLEN S. A COST-OF-
ILLNESS 
ANALYSIS 
OF 
Β-
THALASSAEMIA MAJOR IN CHILDREN IN 
SRI LANKA - EXPERIENCE FROM A 
TERTIARY LEVEL TEACHING HOSPITAL. 
BMC PEDIATR. 2020 MAY 27;20(1):257. 
DOI: 10.1186/S12887-020-02160-3 
 
87. CHUNCHARUNEE S, TEAWTRAKUL N, 
SIRITANARATKUL 
N, 
CHUEAMUANGPHAN N. REVIEW OF 
DISEASE-RELATED 
COMPLICATIONS 
AND 
MANAGEMENT 
IN 
ADULT 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
THALASSEMIA: 
A 
MULTI-CENTER STUDY IN THAILAND. 
PLOS ONE. 2019 MAR 20;14(3):E0214148. 
DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0214148 
 
88. TANTIWORAWIT A, KAMOLSRIPAT T, 
PIRIYAKHUNTORN 
P, 
RATTANATHAMMETHEE 
T, 
HANTRAKOOL S, CHAI-ADISAKSOPHA 
C, 
RATTARITTAMRONG 
E, 
NORASETTHADA L, FANHCHAKSAI K, 
CHAROENKWAN 
P. SURVIVAL AND 
CAUSES OF DEATH IN PATIENTS WITH 
ALPHA AND BETA-THALASSEMIA IN 
NORTHERN THAILAND. ANN MED. 2024 
DEC;56(1):2338246. 
DOI: 
10.1080/07853890.2024.2338246 
 
89. CHAROENKWAN, P. KOMVILAISAK, P. 
THEPSUTHUMMARAT, K. SEKSARN, P. 
TORCHARUS, 
K. 
CAUSES 
OF 
HOSPITALIZATIONS 
IN 
PEDIATRIC 
PATIENTS WITH THALASSEMIA UNDER 
THE NATIONAL HEALTH COVERAGE 
SCHEME IN THAILAND. THALASS. REP. 
2024, 
14, 
10–
17.HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.3390/THALASSR
EP14010002 
90. RIEWPAIBOON A, NUCHPRAYOON I, 
TORCHARUS 
K, 
INDARATNA 
K, 
THAVORNCHAROENSAP M, UBOL BO. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA/HB 
E 
AND 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
THAI 
CHILDREN. BMC RES NOTES. 2010 JAN 
30;3:29. DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-29 
 
91. LEELAHAVRONG P, CHAIKLEDKAEW U, 
HONGENG S, ET AL. A COST-UTILITY 
AND BUDGET IMPACT ANALYSIS OF 
ALLOGENEIC HEMATOPOIETIC STEM 
CELL TRANSPLANTATION FOR SEVERE 
THALASSEMIC PATIENTS IN THAILAND. 
BMC HEALTH SERV RES 2010;10:209. 
DOI:10.1186/1472-6963-10-209 
 
92. KANTAMATURAPOJ 
K, 
KULTHANMANUSORN 
A, 
WITTHAYAPIPOPSAKUL 
W, 
VIRIYATHORN S, PATCHARANARUMOL 
W, 
KANCHANACHITRA 
C, 
WIBULPOLPRASERT 
S, 
TANGCHAROENSATHIEN 
V. 
LEGISLATING 
FOR 
PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTABILITY 
IN 
UNIVERSAL 
HEALTH COVERAGE, THAILAND. BULL 
WORLD HEALTH ORGAN. 2020 FEB 
1;98(2):117-125. 
DOI: 
10.2471/BLT.19.239335 
 
93. RERKSWATTAVORN C, SIRACHAINAN N, 
SONGDEJ 
D, 
KADEGASEM 
P, 
CHUANSUMRIT 
A. 
PREVENTABLE 
SEVERE 
THALASSEMIA 
AMONG 
CHILDREN. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2018 
MAY;42(3):148-153. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2018.1502196 
 
94. HO PJ, HIWASE D, RAMAKRISHNA R, 
VIIALA N, SOLTERBECK A, TRAFICANTE 
R, ZOR E, GERVASIO OL, HIGH LM, ROSS 
DM, BOWDEN 
DK. CARDIAC AND 
HEPATIC 
SIDEROSIS 
IN 
MYELODYSPLASTIC 
SYNDROME, 
THALASSEMIA AND DIVERSE CAUSES 
OF 
TRANSFUSIONDEPENDENT 
ANEMIA: 
THE 
TIMES 
STUDY. 
HEMASPHERE, 
2019;00:00. 
HTTP://DX.DOI.ORG/10.1097/HS9.00000
00000000224 
95. MATTHIESSON HK, BERDOUKAS V, 
BRIGANTI 
EM. 
EXPERIENCES, 
KNOWLEDGE GAPS AND INFORMATION 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
399 
NEEDS OF WOMEN IN AUSTRALIA WITH 
TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
THALASSAEMIA 
IN 
REGARD 
TO 
FERTILITY AND PREGNANCY. MATERN 
CHILD HEALTH J. 2023 NOV;27(11):1961-
1967. DOI: 10.1007/S10995-023-03683-8. 
 
96. CHONG SC, METASSAN S, YUSOF N, 
IDROS R, JOHARI N, ZULKIPLI IN, GHANI 
H, LIM MA, TAIB S, LU ZH, ABDUL-HAMID 
MRW. THALASSEMIA IN ASIA 2021 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
BRUNEI 
DARUSSALAM. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):15-19. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2008959 
 
97. MUNKONGDEE T, TANAKULMAS 
J, 
BUTTHEP P, WINICHAGOON P, MAIN B, 
YIANNAKIS M, GEORGE J, DEVENISH R, 
FUCHAROEN S, SVASTI S. MOLECULAR 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN CAMBODIA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2016 JUN;40(3):163-7. 
DOI: 10.3109/03630269.2016.1158723 
 
98. SOPHÂL C. THALASSEMIA STATUS IN 
CAMBODIA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):10-11. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2008956 
 
99. LAI K, HUANG G, SU L, HE Y. THE 
PREVALENCE OF THALASSEMIA 
IN 
MAINLAND CHINA: EVIDENCE FROM 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL SURVEYS. SCI REP. 
2017 
APR 
19;7(1):920. 
DOI: 
10.1038/S41598-017-00967-2 
 
100. LIN M, MENG Y, WANG Y, ZHENG H, 
LIANG S, ZHAO Q, ZHONG L, YAN S. 
EARLY SCREENING OF THALASSEMIA IN 
PREGNANT WOMEN IN NORTHERN 
CHINA 
BY 
CAPILLARY 
ELECTROPHORESIS 
FOR 
THE 
DETERMINATION 
OF 
HEMOGLOBIN 
ELECTROPHORESIS. CELL MOL BIOL 
(NOISY-LE-GRAND). 
2023 
OCT 
31;69(10):174-178. 
DOI: 
10.14715/CMB/2023.69.10.25 
 
101. WANG WD, HU F, ZHOU DH, GALE RP, LAI 
YR, YAO HX, LI C, WU BY, CHEN Z, FANG 
JP, CHEN SJ, LIANG Y. THALASSAEMIA IN 
CHINA. BLOOD REV. 2023 JUL;60:101074. 
DOI: 10.1016/J.BLRE.2023.101074 
 
102. ZHEN X, MING J, ZHANG R, ZHANG S, XIE 
J, LIU B, WANG Z, SUN X, SHI L. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
OF 
ADULT 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
Β-THALASSAEMIA 
MAJOR 
IN 
MAINLAND 
CHINA. 
ORPHANET J RARE DIS. 2023 AUG 
29;18(1):252. DOI: 10.1186/S13023-023-
02858-4 
 
103. CHEN P, LIN WX, LI SQ. THALASSEMIA IN 
ASIA 2021: THALASSEMIA IN GUANGXI 
PROVINCE, PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
CHINA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JAN;46(1):33-35. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.2008960 
 
104. PHENGSAVANH A, SENGCHANH S, 
SOUKSAKHONE C, SOUVANLASY B, 
SYCHAREUN V. CURRENT STATUS OF 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
LAO 
PEOPLE'S 
DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2022 JAN;46(1):58-61. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2069034 
 
105. MOHD IBRAHIM H, MUDA Z, OTHMAN 
IS, MOHAMED UNNI MN, TEH KH, 
THEVARAJAH A, GUNASAGARAN K, 
ONG GB, YEOH SL, MUHAMMAD RIVAI A, 
CHE MOHD RAZALI CH, DIN ND, ABDUL 
LATIFF Z, JAMAL R, MOHAMAD N, 
MOHD 
ARIFFIN 
H, 
ALIAS 
H. 
OBSERVATIONAL 
STUDY 
ON 
THE 
CURRENT STATUS OF THALASSAEMIA 
IN MALAYSIA: A REPORT FROM THE 
MALAYSIAN THALASSAEMIA REGISTRY. 
BMJ OPEN. 2020 JUN 29;10(6):E037974. 
DOI: 10.1136/BMJOPEN-2020-037974. 
 
106. SHAFIE AA, WONG JHY, IBRAHIM HM, 
MOHAMMED 
NS, 
CHHABRA 
IK. 
ECONOMIC 
BURDEN 
IN 
THE 
MANAGEMENT 
OF 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA PATIENTS 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
400 
IN 
MALAYSIA 
FROM A 
SOCIETAL 
PERSPECTIVE. ORPHANET J RARE DIS. 
2021 
APR 
7;16(1):157. 
DOI: 
10.1186/S13023-021-01791-8 
 
107. CHOW LC, LEE BS, TANG SO, LOH EW, 
NG SC, TAN XY, AHMAD NOORDIN MN, 
ONG GB, CHEW LC. IRON BURDEN AND 
ENDOCRINE 
COMPLICATIONS 
IN 
TRANSFUSION-DEPENDENT 
THALASSEMIA PATIENTS IN SARAWAK, 
MALAYSIA: A RETROSPECTIVE STUDY. 
MED J MALAYSIA. 2024 MAY;79(3):281-
287. PMID: 38817060 
 
108. MOHAMED R, ABDUL RAHMAN AH, 
MASRA F, ABDUL LATIFF Z. BARRIERS TO 
ADHERENCE TO 
IRON 
CHELATION 
THERAPY AMONG ADOLESCENT WITH 
TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
THALASSEMIA. FRONT PEDIATR. 2022 
OCT 
6;10:951947. 
DOI: 
10.3389/FPED.2022.951947 
 
109. MOHD NOR MA, IDRIS NS, MOHD 
ZULKIFLI M, ABU BAKAR R, AHMAD I. 
THALASSEMIA SCREENING: LOW LEVEL 
OF KNOWLEDGE AMONG UNMARRIED 
YOUTHS IN KOTA BHARU, KELANTAN, 
MALAYSIA. MALAYS FAM PHYSICIAN. 
2022 
MAR 
10;17(1):57-65. 
DOI: 
10.51866/OA.31 
 
110. O'DONNELL A, RAIKO A, CLEGG JB, 
WEATHERALL DJ, ALLEN SJ. ALPHA+ -
THALASSAEMIA AND PREGNANCY IN A 
MALARIA ENDEMIC REGION OF PAPUA 
NEW GUINEA. BR J HAEMATOL. 2006 
OCT;135(2):235-41. DOI: 10.1111/J.1365-
2141.2006.06274.X 
 
111. NAGIRIA VR, VINCE JD, DUKE T. LIVING 
WITH THALASSAEMIA IN PAPUA NEW 
GUINEA, 
THE 
EXPERIENCE 
OF 
CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS AND THEIR 
FAMILIES. J PAEDIATR CHILD HEALTH. 
2021 
OCT;57(10):1589-1593. 
DOI: 
10.1111/JPC.15538 
 
112. HALL, J.G.; YUEN, J.; HUNT, J.A.; CHU, 
B.M.; HSIA, Y.E. GENE FREQUENCIES 
FOR THE ALPHA-GLOBIN VARIANTS 
AMONG CHINESE, 
LAOTIANS AND 
FILIPINOS. AM. J. HUM. GENET. 1991, 49, 
470, ABSTRACT 2679 
 
113. KO, T.M.; HWA, H.L.; LIU, C.W.; LI, S.F.; 
CHU, J.Y.; CHEUNG, Y.P. PREVALENCE 
STUDY 
AND 
MOLECULAR 
CHARACTERIZATION 
OF 
ALPHA 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
FILIPINOS. ANN. 
HEMATOL. 1999, 78, 355–357 
 
114. KO, T.M.; CAVILES, A.P., JR.; HWA, H.L.; 
LIU, C.W.; HSU, P.M.; CHUNG, Y.P. 
PREVALENCE 
AND 
MOLECULAR 
CHARACTERIZATION 
OF 
BETA 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
FILIPINOS. ANN. 
HEMATOL. 1998, 77, 257–260 
 
115. MOTULSKY AG, STRANSKY E, FRASER 
GR. 
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE 
DEHYDROGENASE (G6PD) DEFICIENCY, 
THALASSAEMIA, 
AND 
ABNORMAL 
HAEMOGLOBINS IN THE PHILIPPINES. 
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS 1.2 
(1964): 102 
 
 
116. PADILLA, C.D.; THERRELL, 
B.L.,JR.; 
ALCAUSIN, M.M.L.B.; DE CASTRO,R.C., 
JR.; GEPTE, M.B.P.; REYES, M.E.L.; 
JOMENTO, 
C.M.; 
SUAREZ, 
R.C.N.; 
MACEDA, E.B.G.; ABARQUEZ, C.G.; ET 
AL. SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF 
NEWBORN 
SCREENING 
FOR 
HEMOGLOBIN 
DISORDERS 
IN THE 
PHILIPPINES. 
INT. 
J. 
NEONATAL 
SCREEN. 
2021, 
7, 
30. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.3390/IJNS7020030 
 
 
117. YUSON 
ED, 
NARANJO 
MLT. 
THALASSEMIA IN THE PHILIPPINES. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2022 JAN;46(1):36-38. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2021.2023566 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
401 
118. KHAM SK, QUAH TC, LOONG AM, TAN 
PL, FRASER A, CHONG SS, YEOH AE. A 
MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDY 
OF THALASSEMIA USING NEWBORNS' 
CORD BLOOD IN A MULTIRACIAL ASIAN 
POPULATION IN SINGAPORE: RESULTS 
AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR 
A 
POPULATION SCREENING PROGRAM. J 
PEDIATR 
HEMATOL 
ONCOL. 
2004 
DEC;26(12):817-9 
 
119. LAM JCM, LEE SY, KOH PL, FONG SZ, 
ABDUL-KADIR NI, LIM CY, ZHANG X, 
BHATTACHARYYA R, SOH SY, CHAN MY, 
TAN AM, KUPERAN P, ANG AL. CLINICAL 
AND HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF 
LIFE OUTCOMES OF TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSAEMIA PATIENTS 
IN SINGAPORE. BLOOD CELLS MOL DIS. 
2021 
MAY;88:102547. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.BCMD.2021.102547 
 
120. TRAN DC, DANG AL, HOANG TNL, 
NGUYEN CT, LE TMP, DINH TNM, TRAN 
VA, 
DOAN 
TKP, 
NGUYEN 
TT. 
PREVALENCE OF THALASSEMIA IN THE 
VIETNAMESE 
POPULATION 
AND 
BUILDING 
A 
CLINICAL 
DECISION 
SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR PRENATAL 
SCREENING 
FOR 
THALASSEMIA. 
MEDITERR J HEMATOL INFECT DIS. 2023 
MAY 
1;15(1):E2023026. 
DOI: 
10.4084/MJHID.2023.026 
 
121. TUAN-THANH LAM, DOAN-TU NGUYEN, 
QUANG THANH LE, DUY-ANH NGUYEN, 
ET AL. COMBINED GAP-POLYMERASE 
CHAIN 
REACTION 
AND TARGETED 
NEXT-GENERATION 
SEQUENCING 
IMPROVE Α- AND Β-THALASSEMIA 
CARRIER SCREENING IN PREGNANT 
WOMEN IN VIETNAM. HEMOGLOBIN. 
2022 
JUL;46(4):233-239. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630269.2022.2096461 
 
122. TO-MAI XH, NGUYEN HT, NGUYEN-THI 
TT, NGUYEN TV, NGUYEN-THI MN, THAI 
KQ, LAI MT, NGUYEN TA. PREVALENCE 
OF COMMON AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 
MUTATION CARRIERS IN WOMEN IN THE 
SOUTHERN VIETNAM FOLLOWING THE 
APPLICATION OF EXPANDED CARRIER 
SCREENING. 
SCI 
REP. 
2024 
MAR 
29;14(1):7461. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-024-
57513-0]. 
 
123. BACH KQ, NGUYEN HTT, NGUYEN TH, 
NGUYEN 
MB, 
NGUYEN 
TA. 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
VIET 
NAM. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 2022 JAN;46(1):62-65. 
DOI: 10.1080/03630269.2022.2069032 
 
124. BUI VAN VIEN, DUONG BA TRUC ET AL. 
TREATMENT 
AND 
GROWTH 
OF 
THALASSEMIA PATIENTS IN NATIONAL 
HOSPITAL OF PEDIATRICS OF VIETNAM. 
ABSTRACT REPORT OF 2001 
 
125. NHAC-VU HT, TRAN VT, NGUYEN TD, 
PHAM VT, LE T. ECONOMIC BURDEN OF 
THALASSEMIA 
TREATMENT: 
AN 
ANALYSIS FROM THE VIETNAM SOCIAL 
SECURITY PERSPECTIVE. PLOS ONE. 
2023 
NOV 
27;18(11):E0293916. 
DOI: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0293916 
 
126. WU HP, LIN CL, CHANG YC, WU KH, LEI 
RL, PENG CT, WENG T, TAI YM, CHAO YH. 
SURVIVAL AND COMPLICATION RATES 
IN 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR IN TAIWAN. PEDIATR BLOOD 
CANCER. 2017 JAN;64(1):135-138. DOI: 
10.1002/PBC.26181 
 
127. TANGC-H, FURNBACKW, WANGBCM, 
TANGJ, 
TANGD, 
LUM-Y, 
ETAL. 
RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN 
TRANSFUSION BURDEN, HEALTHCARE 
RESOURCE 
UTILIZATION, 
AND 
COMPLICATIONS IN PATIENTS WITH 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
IN TAIWAN: A 
REAL-WORLD 
ANALYSIS. 
TRANSFUSION.2021;61:2906–17. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1111/TRF.16636 
 
128. WANG HC, HSIEH LL, LIU YC, HSIAO HH, 
LIN 
SK, TSAI WC, 
LIU TC. THE 
EPIDEMIOLOGIC 
TRANSITION 
OF 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
402 
THALASSEMIA 
AND 
ASSOCIATED 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN SOUTHERN 
TAIWAN. 
ANN 
HEMATOL. 
2017 
FEB;96(2):183-188. DOI: 10.1007/S00277-
016-2868-7 
 
129. ALIYEVA G, ASADOV C, MAMMADOVA T, 
GAFAROVA 
S, 
GULIYEVA 
Y, 
ABDULALIMOV E. MOLECULAR AND 
GEOGRAPHICAL HETEROGENEITY OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHY MUTATIONS IN 
AZERBAIJANIAN POPULATIONS. ANN 
HUM GENET. 2020 MAY;84(3):249-258. 
DOI: 10.1111/AHG.12367 
 
130. GEORGIEV 
PG, 
SAPUNAROVA 
KG, 
GORANOVA-MARINOVA VS, GORANOV 
SE. REDUCTION OF LIVER IRON LOAD IN 
ADULT 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
Β-
THALASSEMIA MAJOR TREATED WITH 
MODERN 
CHELATION 
MODALITIES. 
FOLIA 
MED 
(PLOVDIV). 
2020 JUN 
30;62(2):265-270. 
DOI: 
10.3897/FOLMED.62.E39518. 
 
131. KYRRI AR, KALOGEROU E, LOIZIDOU D, 
IOANNOU 
C, 
MAKARIOU 
C, 
KYTHREOTIS 
L, 
PHYLACTIDES 
M, 
KOUNTOURIS P, ANGASTINIOTIS M, 
MODELL B, KLEANTHOUS M. THE 
CHANGING 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
OF 
Β-
THALASSEMIA IN THE GREEK-CYPRIOT 
POPULATION. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2013;37(5):435-43. 
DOI: 
10.3109/03630269.2013.801851 
132. KOUNTOURIS 
P, 
KOUSIAPPA 
I, 
PAPASAVVA T, CHRISTOPOULOS G, 
PAVLOU E, PETROU M, ET AL. THE 
MOLECULAR 
SPECTRUM 
AND 
DISTRIBUTION 
OF 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN CYPRUS: A 
20-YEAR RETROSPECTIVE STUDY. SCI 
REP. 
2016 
MAY 
20;6:26371. 
DOI: 
10.1038/SREP26371 
 
133. KOUNTOURIS 
P, 
MICHAILIDOU 
K, 
CHRISTOU 
S, 
HADJIGAVRIEL 
M, 
SITAROU 
M, 
KOLNAGOU 
A, 
KLEANTHOUS M, TELFER P. EFFECT OF 
HBB GENOTYPE ON SURVIVAL IN A 
COHORT 
OF 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS 
IN CYPRUS. HAEMATOLOGICA. 2021 SEP 
1;106(9):2458-2468. 
DOI: 
10.3324/HAEMATOL.2020.260224. 
 
134. ANGASTINIOTIS 
M, 
CHRISTOU 
S, 
KOLNAKOU A, PANGALOU E, SAVVIDOU 
I, FARMAKIS D, ELEFTHERIOU A. THE 
OUTCOMES 
OF 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
HAEMOGLOBIN DIOSRDERS IN CYPRUS: 
A 
JOINED 
REPORT 
OF 
THE 
THALASSAEMIA 
INTERNATIONAL 
FEDERATION AND THE NICOSIA & 
PAPHOS 
THALASSAEMIA 
CENTRES. 
THALASS 
REP. 
2022, 
12, 
143-156. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.3390/THALASSREP
12040019 
 
135. EFREMOV GD. THALASSEMIAS AND 
OTHER HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN THE 
REPUBLIC 
OF 
MACEDONIA. 
HEMOGLOBIN. 
2007;31(1):1-15. 
DOI: 
10.1080/03630260601056726 
 
136. VOSKARIDOU 
E, 
KATTAMIS 
A, 
FRAGODIMITRI 
C, 
KOURAKLI 
A, 
CHALKIA P, DIAMANTIDIS M, VLACHAKI 
E, 
DROSOU 
M, 
LAFIONIATIS 
S, 
MARAGKOS 
K, 
PETROPOULOU 
F, 
EFTIHIADIS 
E, 
ECONOMOU 
M, 
KLIRONOMOS 
E, 
KOUTSOUKA 
F, 
NESTORA 
K, 
TZOUMARI 
I, 
PAPAGEORGIOU 
O, 
BASILEIADI 
A, 
LAFIATIS I, DIMITRIADOU E, KALPAKA A, 
KALKANA C, 
XANTHOPOULIDIS 
G, 
ADAMOPOULOS 
I, 
KAIAFAS 
P, 
MPITZIONI A, GOULA A, KONTONIS I, 
ALEPI 
C, 
ANASTASIADIS 
A, 
PAPADOPOULOU 
M, 
MAILI 
P, 
DIONISOPOULOU D, TSIRKA A, MAKIS A, 
KOSTARIDOU 
S, 
POLITOU 
M, 
PAPASSOTIRIOU 
I; 
GREEK 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
STUDY 
GROUP. 
NATIONAL 
REGISTRY 
OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
IN GREECE: 
UPDATED DEMOGRAPHICS, CURRENT 
TRENDS IN AFFECTED BIRTHS, AND 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
403 
CAUSES 
OF 
MORTALITY. 
ANN 
HEMATOL. 2019 JAN;98(1):55-66. DOI: 
10.1007/S00277-018-3493-4. 
 
137. KATTAMIS A, VOSKARIDOU E, DELICOU 
S, KLIRONOMOS E, LAFIATIS I, ET AL. 
REAL-WORLD COMPLICATION BURDEN 
AND 
DISEASE 
MANAGEMENT 
PARADIGMS 
IN 
TRANSFUSION-
RELATED Β-THALASSAEMIA IN GREECE: 
RESULTS 
FROM 
ULYSSES, 
AN 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL, 
MULTICENTRE, 
RETROSPECTIVE 
CROSS-SECTIONAL 
STUDY. EJHAEM. 2023 MAY 23;4(3):569-
581. DOI: 10.1002/JHA2.695 
 
138. SOULIOTIS K; GOLNA C; NIKOLAIDI S; 
VATHEIA G; HASURDJIEV S. ACCESS TO 
HEALTH CARE FOR PATIENTS WITH 
THALASSAEMIA IN GREECE: A CROSS-
SECTIONAL STUDY. EAST MEDITERR 
HEALTH 
J. 
2020;26(12):1482–1492. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.26719/EMHJ.20.118 
 
139. KLONIZAKIS P, ROY N, PAPATSOUMA I, 
MAINOU 
M, 
CHRISTODOULOU 
I, 
PANTELIDOU 
D, 
KOKKOTA 
S, 
DIAMANTIDIS M, KOURAKLI A, LAZARIS 
V, ANDRIOPOULOS 
D, TSAPAS A, 
KLAASSEN RJ, VLACHAKI E. A CROSS-
SECTIONAL, MULTICENTRIC, DISEASE-
SPECIFIC, HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY 
OF LIFE STUDY IN GREEK TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS. 
HEALTHCARE 
(BASEL). 
2024 
FEB 
22;12(5):524. 
DOI: 
10.3390/HEALTHCARE12050524  
 
140. BORGNA-PIGNATTI C, RUGOLOTTO S, 
DE STEFANO P, PIGA A, DI GREGORIO F, 
GAMBERINI MR, SABATO V, MELEVENDI 
C, 
CAPPELLINI 
MD, 
VERLATO 
G. 
SURVIVAL 
AND 
DISEASE 
COMPLICATIONS 
IN 
THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR. ANN N Y ACAD SCI. 1998; 
850:227-31. 
DOI: 
10.1111/J.1749-
6632.1998.TB10479.X. 
 
141. LONGO F, CORRIERI P, ORIGA R, 
BARELLA S, SANNA PMG, BITTI PP, 
ZUCCARELLI A, COMMENDATORE FV, 
VITUCCI 
A, 
QUARTA 
A, 
LISI 
R, 
CAPPELLINI MD, MASSEI F, FORNI GL, 
PIGA A. CHANGING PATTERNS OF 
THALASSAEMIA IN ITALY: A WEBTHAL 
PERSPECTIVE. BLOOD TRANSFUS. 2020. 
DOI: 10.2450/2020.0143-20.  
 
142. BONIFAZI F, CONTE R, BAIARDI P, 
BONIFAZI D, FELISI M, GIORDANO P, 
GIANNUZZI V, IACONO A, PADULA R, 
PEPE A, CATERINA PUTTI M, RUGGIERI L, 
CARLO DEL VECCHIO G, FILOSA A, 
MAGGIO 
A, 
CECI 
A; 
HTA-THAL 
MULTIREGIONAL REGISTRY. PATTERN 
OF COMPLICATIONS AND BURDEN OF 
DISEASE IN PATIENTS AFFECTED BY 
BETA THALASSEMIA MAJOR. CURR MED 
RES OPIN. 2017 AUG;33(8):1525-1533. 
DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2017.1326890 
 
143. FORNI GL, GIANESIN B, MUSALLAM KM, 
LONGO F, ROSSO R, LISI R, GAMBERINI 
MR, ET BAL. WEBTHAL® PROJECT. 
OVERALL AND COMPLICATION-FREE 
SURVIVAL IN A LARGE COHORT OF 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
Β-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR FOLLOWED OVER 50 YEARS. AM 
J HEMATOL. 2023 MAR;98(3):381-387. 
DOI: 10.1002/AJH.26798 
 
144. PINTO VM, POGGI M, RUSSO R, GIUSTI A, 
FORNI GL. MANAGEMENT OF THE 
AGING 
BETA-THALASSEMIA 
TRANSFUSION-DEPENDENT 
POPULATION 
- 
THE 
ITALIAN 
EXPERIENCE. 
BLOOD 
REV. 
2019 
NOV;38:100594. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.BLRE.2019.100594 
 
145. COLOMBATTI 
R, 
MARTELLA 
M, 
CATTANEO L, VIOLA G, CAPPELLARI A, 
BERGAMO C, AZZENA S, SCHIAVON S, 
BARALDI E, DALLA BARBA B, TRAFOJER 
U, CORTI P, UGGERI M, TAGLIABUE PE, 
ZORLONI C, BRACCHI M, BIONDI A, 
BASSO G, MASERA N, SAINATI L. 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
404 
RESULTS 
OF 
A 
MULTICENTER 
UNIVERSAL 
NEWBORN 
SCREENING 
PROGRAM FOR SICKLE CELL DISEASE IN 
ITALY: A CALL TO ACTION. PEDIATR 
BLOOD 
CANCER. 
2019 
MAY;66(5):E27657. 
DOI: 
10.1002/PBC.27657. 
 
146. ANTMEN A, ANGELUCCI E,  LOSI S, 
BURROWS N, BARTIROMO C, HU H. 
DIRECT 
MEDICAL 
CARE 
COST 
ASSOCIATED WITH Β-THALASSEMIA 
CARE IN TURKEY. BLOOD BLOOD (2017) 
130 
(SUPPL_1) 
: 
2094. 
HTTP://DOI.ORG/10.1182/BLOOD.V130.S
UPPL_1.2094.2094 
 
147. AYDINOK Y, OYMAK Y, ATABAY B, 
AYDOĞAN G, YEŞILIPEK A, ÜNAL S, 
KILINÇ Y, ET AL. A NATIONAL REGISTRY 
OF 
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
TURKEY: 
DEMOGRAPHIC 
AND 
DISEASE 
CHARACTERISTICS 
OF 
PATIENTS, 
ACHIEVEMENTS, AND CHALLENGES IN 
PREVENTION. TURK J HAEMATOL. 2018 
MAR 
1;35(1):12-18. 
DOI: 
10.4274/TJH.2017.0039 
 
148. TALMACI R, CORIU D, DAN L, CHERRY L, 
GAVRILA L, BARBARII L, DOGARU M, 
VLADAREANU 
F, 
VLADAREANU 
R, 
PELTECU G, COLITA D. PRENATAL 
MOLECULAR DIAGNOSIS OF BETA-
THALASSEMIA: REPORT ON THE FIRST 
TWO CASES IN ROMANIA. J MED LIFE. 
2008 APR-JUN;1(2):138-47 
 
149. MARCO 
SÁNCHEZ 
JM, 
BARDÓN 
CANCHO EJ, BENÉITEZ D, PAYÁN-
PERNÍA S, COLLADO GIMBERT A, RUIZ-
LLOBET A, SALINAS JA, SEBASTIÁN E, 
ARGILÉS B, BERMÚDEZ M, VÁZQUEZ 
MÁ, ORTEGA MJ, LÓPEZ RUBIO M, 
GONDRA A, URIZ JJ, MORADO M, COLL 
MT, LÓPEZ DUARTE M, BARO M, 
CERVERA Á, RECASENS V, GARCÍA 
BLANES C, 
DEL CARCAVILLA 
MP, 
TALLON 
M, GONZÁLEZ 
ESPÍN A, 
OLTEANU OLTEANU FC, GONZÁLEZ P, 
DEL MAÑÚ PEREIRA MM, CELA E. 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES AND OTHER 
RARE ANEMIAS IN SPAIN: TEN YEARS OF 
A NATIONWIDE REGISTRY (REHEM-AR). 
ANN HEMATOL. 2024 AUG;103(8):2743-
2755. DOI: 10.1007/S00277-024-05788-8 
 
150. CANATAN D, VIVES CORRONS JL, 
PIACENTINI G, KARA F, KESKINKILIÇ B, 
TEZEL B, KÜLEKÇI UĞUR A, BABAYIĞIT 
M, KRISHNEVSKAYA E, MILLIMAGGI G, 
ERINEKÇI O, ÖZDEMIR Z, DE SANCTIS V. 
IMMIGRATION 
AND 
SCREENING 
PROGRAMS 
FOR 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES IN ITALY, SPAIN 
AND TURKEY. ACTA BIOMED. 2021 SEP 
2;92(4):E2021410. 
DOI: 
10.23750/ABM.V92I4.11965 
 
151. ANGASTINIOTIS 
M, 
CANNON 
L,  
ANTONIOU 
E, 
BRUNETTA 
AL, 
CONSTANTINOU 
G, 
KNOLL 
EM, 
LOUKOPOULOS 
D 
,SKAFI 
A, 
ELEFTHERIOU 
A. 
HEMOGLOBIN 
DISORDERS IN EUROPE: A SYSTEMATIC 
EFFORT 
OF 
IDENTIFYING 
AND 
ADDRESSING 
UNMET 
NEEDS AND 
CHALLENGES BY THE THALASSEMIA 
INTERNATIONAL 
FEDERATION. 
THALASSEMIA REPORTS 2021; 11:9803 
 
152. ISABELLE THURET, THE VALUE OF 
PATIENT REGISTERS: THE EXAMPLE OF 
THE FRENCH REGISTER FOR BETA-
THALASSEMIA. PRESENTED AT THE 
2ND PAN-EUROPEAN CONFERENCE 
 
153. AGOUTI I, THURET I , BERNIT E , 
GALACTEROS F, ET AL. DATA FROM THE 
FRENCH 
REGISTRY 
FOR 
BETA-
THALASSEMIA 
PATIENTS. 
EHA 
LEARNING CENTER. BADENS C. JUN 14, 
2019; 266587 
 
154. KUNZ JB, 
LOBITZ S, GROSSE 
R, 
OEVERMANN L ET AL. SICKLE CELL 
DISEASE IN GERMANY: RESULTS FROM 
A 
NATIONAL 
REGISTRY. 
PEDIATR 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
405 
BLOOD CANCER. 2020 APR;67(4):E28130. 
DOI: 10.1002/PBC.28130 
 
155. LOBITZ S, KUNZ JB, CARIO H, HAKIMEH 
D, 
JARISCH 
A, 
KULOZIK 
AE, 
OEVERMANN 
L, 
GROSSE 
R. 
INTRODUCTION 
OF 
UNIVERSAL 
NEWBORN SCREENING FOR SICKLE 
CELL DISEASE IN GERMANY-A BRIEF 
NARRATIVE REVIEW. INT J NEONATAL 
SCREEN. 
2021 
JAN 
28;7(1):7. 
DOI: 
10.3390/IJNS701000 
 
156. ABREU DE MIANI MS, PEÑALVER JA. 
INCIDENCIA 
DE 
PORTADORES 
B-
TALASEMICOS Y DE PACIENTES DE LA 
GLUCOSA-6-FOSFATO 
DEHIDROGENASA (G6FD) EN EL AREA 
DEL GRAN BUENOS AIRES. SANGRE 
1983;28:537-41. 
 
157. LUZ JD, AVILA A, ICASURIAGA S, 
GONGÓRA M, CASTILLO L, SERRÓN A, 
KIMURA EM, COSTA FF, SANS M, SONATI 
MDE F. FREQUENCY AND SPECTRUM OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHY MUTATIONS IN A 
URUGUAYAN PEDIATRIC POPULATION. 
GENET MOL BIOL. 2013 SEP;36(3):316-22. 
DOI: 10.1590/S1415-47572013005000027. 
 
158. SERJEANT GR, SERJEANT BE, MASON 
KP, GARDNER R, WARREN L, GIBSON F, 
COOMBS M. NEWBORN SCREENING 
FOR SICKLE CELL DISEASE IN JAMAICA: 
LOGISTICS AND EXPERIENCE WITH 
UMBILICAL 
CORD 
SAMPLES. 
J 
COMMUNITY GENET. 2017 JAN;8(1):17-
22. DOI: 10.1007/S12687-016-0283-3. 
 
159. SERJEANT GR, SERJEANT BE, MASON 
KP, GIBSON F, GARDNER RA, WARREN L, 
REID M, HAPPICH M, KULOZIK AE. THE 
BETA 
THALASSAEMIA 
TRAIT 
IN 
JAMAICA. J COMMUNITY GENET. 2023 
JUN 30. DOI: 10.1007/S12687-023-00657-
9. 
 
160. CÂNDIDO-BACANI PM, GRILO PMS, 
RAMOS VDS, ZANCHIN M, PEREIRA IC, 
OLIVEIRA JSP, BACANI VM, BELINI 
JUNIOR 
E. 
INCIDENCE 
OF 
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
AND 
SPATIALIZATION OF NEWBORNS WITH 
SICKLE CELL TRAIT IN MATO GROSSO 
DO SUL, 
BRAZIL. 
EINSTEIN 
(SAO 
PAULO). 2022 MAY 16;20:EAO6535. DOI: 
10.31744/EINSTEIN_JOURNAL/2022AO6
535 
 
161. BRANDELISE S, PINHEIRO V, GABETTA 
CS, 
HAMBLETON 
I, 
SERJEANT 
B, 
SERJEANT G. NEWBORN SCREENING 
FOR SICKLE CELL DISEASE IN BRAZIL: 
THE CAMPINAS EXPERIENCE. CLIN LAB 
HAEMATOL. 2004 FEB;26(1):15-9. DOI: 
10.1111/J.0141-9854.2003.00576.X 
 
162. BONINI-DOMINGOS C. 
REV. 
BRAS. 
HEMATOL. HEMOTER. 2004;26(4):288-
289. THALASSEMIA SCREENING 
IN 
BRAZIL – RESULTS FOR 20 YEARS 
(LETTER TO EDITOR) 
 
163. KIM 
E, 
GRAVES 
E, 
AJAYI 
LT, 
PENDERGRASTJ.. HOW MANY SICKLE 
CELL DISEASE PATIENTS ARE THERE IN 
ONTARIO? RESULTS OF A QUERY OF 
HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATIVE 
DATABASES. SICKLE CELL DISEASE 
ASSOCIATION 
OF 
CANADA, 
PRESENTATION; 
2019: 
HTTPS://SICKLECELLANEMIA.CA/WP-
CONTENT/UPLOADS/PDF_PUBLIC/AHR
Q_SICKLE_CELL_ABSTRACT_2018.PDF  
 
164. ZHOU JR, RIDSDALE R, MACNEIL L, 
LILLEY M, HOANG S, CHRISTIAN S, 
BLUMENSCHEIN P, WOLAN V, BRUCE A, 
SINGH G, WRIGHT N, PARBOOSINGH JS, 
LAMONT RE, SOSOVA I. THE ALBERTA 
NEWBORN SCREENING APPROACH FOR 
SICKLE 
CELL 
DISEASE: 
THE 
ADVANTAGES 
OF 
MOLECULAR 
TESTING. INT J NEONATAL SCREEN. 
2021;7(4):78. DOI: 10.3390/IJNS7040078  
 
165. EL-HAJ N, HOPPE CC. NEWBORN 
SCREENING FOR SCD IN THE USA AND 
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
406 
CANADA. INT J NEONATAL SCREEN. 
2018 
NOV 
26;4(4):36. 
DOI: 
10.3390/IJNS4040036. 
 
166. SNYDER AB, LAKSHMANAN S, HULIHAN 
MM, 
PAULUKONIS 
ST, 
ZHOU 
M, 
HORIUCHI SS, ABE K, POPE SN, SCHIEVE 
LA. SURVEILLANCE FOR SICKLE CELL 
DISEASE 
- 
SICKLE 
CELL 
DATA 
COLLECTION PROGRAM, TWO STATES, 
2004-2018. MMWR SURVEILL SUMM. 
2022 
OCT 
7;71(9):1-18. 
DOI: 
10.15585/MMWR.SS7109A1. 
 
167. OJODU J, HULIHAN MM, POPE SN, 
GRANT AM; CENTERS FOR DISEASE 
CONTROL AND PREVENTION (CDC). 
INCIDENCE OF SICKLE CELL TRAIT--
UNITED STATES, 2010. MMWR MORB 
MORTAL 
WKLY 
REP. 
2014 
DEC 
12;63(49):1155-8. 
168. MAYERS, H, VUMA, S. PREDICTORS OF 
THALASSAEMIA CARRIERS IN TRINIDAD 
AND TOBAGO. WEST INDIAN MED. J; 
(SUPPL): 2015. 
 
169. VARGAS-HERNÁNDEZ DA, USCATEGUI-
RUIZ AC, PRADA-RUEDA AJ, ROMERO-
SÁNCHEZ 
C. 
SICKLE 
CELL TRAIT, 
CLINICAL 
MANIFESTATIONS 
AND 
OUTCOMES: 
A 
CROSS-SECTIONAL 
STUDY IN COLOMBIA: INCREASING 
RATE OF SYMPTOMATIC SUBJECTS 
LIVING IN HIGH ALTITUDE. MEDITERR J 
HEMATOL INFECT 
DIS. 2023 MAR 
1;15(1):E2023015. 
DOI: 
10.4084/MJHID.2023.015. 
 
170. FONG C, LIZARRALDE-IRAGORRI MA, 
ROJAS-GALLARDO 
D, 
BARRETO G. 
FREQUENCY 
AND 
ORIGIN 
OF 
HAPLOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH THE 
BETA-GLOBIN 
GENE 
CLUSTER 
IN 
INDIVIDUALS WITH TRAIT AND SICKLE 
CELL ANEMIA IN THE ATLANTIC AND 
PACIFIC 
COASTAL 
REGIONS 
OF 
COLOMBIA. GENET MOL BIOL. 2013 
DEC;36(4):494-7. 
DOI: 
10.1590/S1415-
47572013000400005. 
 
171. MARCHECO-TERUEL B. SICKLE CELL 
ANEMIA IN CUBA: PREVENTION AND 
MANAGEMENT, 
1982-2018. 
MEDICC 
REV. 
2019 
OCT;21(4):34-38. 
DOI: 
10.37757/MR2019.V21.N4.6. 
 
172. AGUILA JD, ZAMORA MC, FERNÁNDEZ 
OA, JIMÉNEZ LP, VICENTE OM, ALVAREZ 
IV. 
COMPREHENSIVE 
CARE 
FOR 
PATIENTS WITH SICKLE CELL DISEASE IN 
CUBA. 
HAEMATOLOGICA. 
2008 
JAN;93(1):E20. 
DOI: 
10.3324/HAEMATOL.11986 
 
173. COLLIER, W. A., DE LA PARRA, D. A. 
JOURNAL ARTICLE : DOCUMENTA DE 
MEDICINA GEOGRAPHICA ET TROPICA 
1952 VOL.4 NO.3 PP.223-5 
 
174. WEISS M, PARISI JUN M, SHETH S. 
CLINICAL AND ECONOMIC BURDEN OF 
REGULARLY 
TRANSFUSED 
ADULT 
PATIENTS WITH Β-THALASSEMIA IN THE 
UNITED STATES: A RETROSPECTIVE 
COHORT STUDY USING PAYER CLAIMS. 
AM J HEMATOL. 2019 MAY;94(5):E129-
E132. DOI: 10.1002/AJH.25429. 
 
175. ALSHAMSI S, HAMIDI S, NARCI HO. 
HEALTHCARE RESOURCE UTILIZATION 
AND DIRECT COSTS OF TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT THALASSEMIA PATIENTS 
IN DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: A 
RETROSPECTIVE 
COST-OF-ILLNESS 
STUDY. BMC HEALTH SERV RES. 2022 
MAR 5;22(1):304. DOI: 10.1186/S12913-
022-07663-6. 
 
176. LANGHI D JR, UBIALI EM, MARQUES JF 
JR, VERISSIMO MA, LOGGETTO SR, 
SILVINATO 
A, 
BERNARDO 
WM. 
GUIDELINES ON BETA-THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR 
- 
REGULAR 
BLOOD 
TRANSFUSION THERAPY: ASSOCIAÇÃO 
BRASILEIRA 
DE 
HEMATOLOGIA, 
HEMOTERAPIA E TERAPIA CELULAR: 
PROJECT GUIDELINES: ASSOCIAÇÃO 
MÉDICA BRASILEIRA - 2016. REV BRAS 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
407 
HEMATOL 
HEMOTER. 
2016 
OCT-
DEC;38(4):341-345. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.BJHH.2016.09.003 
 
177. CHAPCHAP EC, SILVA MMA, DE ASSIS 
RA, KERBAUY LN, DINIZ MDS, ET AL. 
CARDIAC 
IRON 
OVERLOAD 
EVALUATION 
IN 
THALASSAEMIC 
PATIENTS 
USING 
T2* 
MAGNETIC 
RESONANCE 
IMAGING 
FOLLOWING 
CHELATION THERAPY: A MULTICENTRE 
CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY. HEMATOL 
TRANSFUS CELL THER. 2023 JAN-
MAR;45(1):7-15. 
DOI: 
10.1016/J.HTCT.2021.01.014 
 
178. BONINI C. THALASSEMIA SCREENING IN 
BRAZIL –RESULTS FOR 20 YEARS. 
REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE HEMATOLOGIA 
E 
HEMOTERAPIA 
26(4) 
DOI:10.1590/S1516-84842004000400011 
 
179. ROSSETTI LC, TARGOVNIK HM, VARELA 
V. THE MOLECULAR BASIS OF BETA-
THALASSEMIA 
IN 
ARGENTINA. 
INFLUENCE OF THE 
PATTERN OF 
IMMIGRATION 
FROM 
THE 
MEDITERRANEAN 
BASIN. 
HAEMATOLOGICA. 2004 JUN;89(6):746-7 
 
180. BAILEY J, BAKER-ROSARIA J, BALKARAN 
S, BALKISSOON N, BANDO C, BAPTISTE 
A, BARCAN MC, BASDEO M, CHARLES K. 
THE BURDEN OF BETA THALASSEMIA 
MAJOR ON BLOOD BANKS AT A 
TERTIARY INSTITUTION IN TRINIDAD 
AND 
TOBAGO. 
DEPARTMENT 
OF 
PARACLINICAL SCIENCE, FACULTY OF 
MEDICAL SCIENCES, THE UNIVERSITY 
OF 
WEST 
INDIES 
2023. 
HTTPS://LIBRARIES.STA.UWI.EDU/MSL/I
MAGES/24THANNUALRESEARCHDAY/G
P2BALKISSOONCHARLES-POSTER.PDF 
 
181. CHAPIN J, COHEN AR, NEUFELD EJ, 
VICHINSKY 
E, 
GIARDINA 
PJ, 
BOUDREAUX J, LE BC, KENNEY K, 
TRIMBLE S, THOMPSON AA. AN UPDATE 
ON THE US ADULT THALASSAEMIA 
POPULATION: A REPORT FROM THE 
CDC 
THALASSAEMIA 
TREATMENT 
CENTRES. 
BR J 
HAEMATOL. 
2022 
JAN;196(2):380-389. 
DOI: 
10.1111/BJH.17920 
 
182. EL-HAJ N, HOPPE CC. NEWBORN 
SCREENING FOR SCD IN THE USA AND 
CANADA. INT J NEONATAL SCREEN. 
2018 
NOV 
26;4(4):36. 
DOI: 
10.3390/IJNS4040036 
 
183. UDEZE 
C, 
EVANS 
KA, 
YANG 
Y, 
LILLEHAUGEN T, MANJELIEVSKAIA J, 
MUJUMDAR U, LI N, ANDEMARIAM B. 
ECONOMIC AND CLINICAL BURDEN OF 
MANAGING 
TRANSFUSION-
DEPENDENT Β-THALASSEMIA IN THE 
UNITED STATES. J MED ECON. 2023 JAN-
DEC;26(1):924-932. 
DOI: 
10.1080/13696998.2023.2235928 
 
184. TAN JY, YEO YH, CHAN KH, SHAABAN 
HS, GURON G. CAUSES OF DEATH AND 
MORTALITY TRENDS IN INDIVIDUALS 
WITH THALASSEMIA IN THE UNITED 
STATES, 1999-2020. J BLOOD MED. 2024 
AUG 
5;15:331-339. 
DOI: 
10.2147/JBM.S470177 
 
185. A. DJENOUNI ET AL PRESENTED AT THE 
39TH CONGRESS OF THE FRENCH 
SOCIETY OF HAEMATOLOGY, 2019 
 
186. FATIHA 
GRIFI, 
A 
DJENOUNI, 
S 
BOUGHERIRA, MT ABAD, C BOUCHERIT, 
N BOUDJERRA, N ZIDANI, C ABOURA, A 
ARIBI, 
M 
BELHANI, 
ET 
AL. 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL 
STUDY 
ON 
Β-
THALASSEMIA IN ALGERIA. BLOOD 
(2018) 132 (SUPPLEMENT 1): 4902. 
HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.1182/BLOOD-2018-
99-112812 
 
187. TEDONE 
F, 
LAMENDOLA 
P, 
LOPATRIELLO S, CAFIERO D, PIOVANI D, 
FORNI GL. QUALITY OF LIFE AND 
BURDEN OF 
DISEASE 
IN 
ITALIAN 
PATIENTS 
WITH 
TRANSFUSION-
THE PREVENTION OF THALASSAEMIA REVISITED BY THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
A HISTORICAL AND ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE 
408 
DEPENDENT 
BETA-THALASSEMIA. 
J 
CLIN MED. 2021 DEC 21;11(1):15. DOI: 
10.3390/JCM11010015. 
 
188. FOONG WC, CHEAN KY, RAHIM FF, GOH 
AS, YEOH SL, YEOH AAC. QUALITY OF 
LIFE AND CHALLENGES EXPERIENCED 
BY THE SURVIVING ADULTS WITH 
TRANSFUSION 
DEPENDENT 
THALASSAEMIA IN MALAYSIA: A CROSS 
SECTIONAL STUDY. HEALTH QUAL LIFE 
OUTCOMES. 2022 JAN 8;20(1):2. DOI: 
10.1186/S12955-021-01897-4.  
 
189. MEHTA 
V, 
KIRUBARAJAN 
A, 
SABOUHANIAN A, JAYAWARDENA SM, 
CHANDRAKUMARAN P, THANGAVELU 
N, 
CADER 
R, 
METTANANDA 
S, 
BANDARA D, KHAN S, WEATHERALL DJ, 
ALLEN 
A, 
PREMAWARDHENA 
AP, 
OLIVIERI NF. LEG ULCERS: A REPORT IN 
PATIENTS WITH HEMOGLOBIN E BETA 
THALASSEMIA AND REVIEW OF THE 
LITERATURE 
IN 
SEVERE 
BETA 
THALASSEMIA. 
ACTA 
HAEMATOL. 
2022;145(3):334-343. 
DOI: 
10.1159/000520731.  
 
190. EKWATTANAKIT S, HANTAWEEPANT C, 
KHUHAPINANT A, SIRITANARATKUL N, 
VIPRAKASIT V. AN URGENT NEED FOR 
IMPROVING THALASSEMIA CARE DUE 
TO THE WIDE GAP IN CURRENT REAL-
LIFE PRACTICE AND CLINICAL PRACTICE 
GUIDELINES. 
SCI 
REP. 
2021 
JUN 
24;11(1):13283. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-021-
92715-W. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
409 
 
 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
410 
12. THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M., Eleftheriou A. & Farmakis D. 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Registries are organized systems that use observational study methods to collect uniform data on individuals 
of a specific population defined by a disease, condition, or exposure, in order to serve a predefined clinical, 
scientific, administrative or other purpose. They can be extremely powerful evidence generating tools while 
providing a central meeting point for all implicated stakeholders, facilitating their networking and interaction. 
Registries can play a major role in addressing the challenges that the care of thalassaemia patients is currently 
facing. By collecting updated and representative data on disease burden, features, management and outcomes 
at local, national, regional and global level, thalassaemia registries may allow the evaluation and benchmarking 
of provided healthcare services, the detection of unmet clinical needs and the identification of inequalities in 
healthcare delivery. 
A total of 16 national thalassaemia registries are in place since 1984, being characterized by heterogeneity and 
incomplete geographic coverage. Representativeness, interoperability, harmonization, quality assurance and 
sustainability are important features that thalassaemia registries should pursue. 
The Thalassaemia International Federation aims at playing a key role in promoting the coordination and 
collaboration among existing thalassaemia registries and the establishment of new ones, with particular focus 
on areas of emerging economies. In this regard, TIF has undertaken the design, development and 
implementation of a web-based platform to host a global thalassaemia registry. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In 2014, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) defined registries as organized systems that 
use observational study methods to collect uniform data on individuals of a specific population defined by a 
disease, condition, or exposure, in order to serve a predefined clinical, scientific, administrative or other purpose 
[1]. 
Registries can be classified by various criteria, including their primary objective (public health, clinical, 
administrative or product registries), geographical coverage (population or non-population-based and local, 
national, regional or international), drivers (physician or patient-driven), data collection methods (paper or 
electronic-based), administration schemes and many others [2]. 
Registries can be extremely powerful evidence generating tools. They collect real-world data on the 
epidemiology, clinical characteristics, physical history, management and outcomes of specific diseases and 
conditions. These pieces of evidence are valuable for the evaluation and benchmarking of provided healthcare 
services, the identification of unmet clinical needs and the detection of inequalities in healthcare.  These 
information sources may in turn inform all implicated stakeholders to better plan their goals and activities, 
including governments and healthcare authorities, regulatory bodies, physicians, basic and clinical researchers, 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
411 
industry stakeholders and patient organizations and advocacy groups. Registries can further provide a central 
meeting point for all the aforementioned stakeholders, facilitating their networking and interaction [3]. 
In this context, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has stressed the important role that registries may play 
in pharmacovigilance, regulatory decision-making and post-authorization monitoring. For this reason, the EMA 
launched in 2015 an initiative to make better use of existing registries and facilitate the development of quality 
new ones, promoting more systematic and standardized approaches that enhance the contribution of registries 
to the safety of medicines [4]. 
To serve the aforementioned purposes, registries should be populated by accurate, representative, prospective 
and usable data. The introduction and widespread distribution of electronic databases and digital healthcare 
records has considerably facilitated the development and maintenance of quality clinical registries through the 
use of integrated software solutions [5]. 
Registries are particularly important for rare diseases (RD). RD are defined as medical conditions with a 
prevalence of 1/2000 or less; almost 80% of these disorders have a genetical origin [6]. Although RD collectively 
are not rare, as they affect 1 every 17 people [6], the low prevalence of each individual disorder poses an 
important barrier for the collection of a critical bulk of evidence, which may in turn adversely affect the quality 
of healthcare provided to these [3]. Registries are the ideal tool to overcome this barrier by ensuring pooling of 
data from different populations to create the necessary bulk of evidence. The European Organisation for Rare 
Diseases, the National Organization for Rare Disorders and the Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders 
(EURORDIS, NORD, CORD respectively) defined in 2012 a list of 10 principles for the development of RD 
registries [7]. These principles are summarized in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. European Organisation for Rare Diseases, the National Organization for Rare Disorders and the Canadian 
Organization for Rare Disorders (EURORDIS-NORD-CORD) principles for rare disease (RD) registries [7]. 
1 
RD registries should be recognised as a global priority. 
2 
RD registries should encompass the widest geographic scope possible. 
3 
RD registries should be centred on a disease or group of diseases rather than a therapeutic intervention. 
4 
Interoperability and harmonization between RD registries should be consistently pursued. 
5 
A minimum set of Common Data Elements should be consistently used in all RD registries. 
6 
RD registries data should be linked with corresponding biobank data. 
7 
RD registries should include data directly reported by patients along with data reported by healthcare 
professionals 
8 
Public-Private Partnerships should be encouraged to ensure sustainability of RD registries. 
9 
Patients should be equally involved with other stakeholders in the governance of RD registries. 
10 
RD registries should serve as key instruments for building and empowering patient communities. 
 
THE NEED FOR REGISTRIES IN THALASSAEMIA 
Disease Burden 
Haemoglobinopathies, including thalassaemias and sickle cell disease, are inherited haemoglobin disorders, 
caused by genetically determined, quantitative or qualitative impairment of synthesis of globin chains, 
resulting in chronic haemolytic anaemia and other complications [8, 9]. Haemoglobinopathies constitute the 
most common monogenic disorders in humans. It is estimated that 5.2% of the world population carries a 
clinically significant haemoglobinopathy gene variant, while 1.1% of couples worldwide are at risk of having 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
412 
children with a haemoglobinopathy [10]. Although highly prevalent and once confined to certain geographical 
areas, including sub-Saharan Africa for sickle cell disease and the Mediterranean Basin, Middle East, South and 
Southeast Asia for thalassaemia, migration of populations has render them globally distributed (for more 
information see Chapter on Epidemiology). 
Thalassaemias are caused by the reduced or depleted synthesis of the alpha (α) or beta (β) globin chain that 
results to chronic anaemia in many cases, as in thalassaemia major, anaemia is severe and requires repetitive 
blood transfusions for survival. Over time, complications arise in vital organs, which require regular monitoring 
and multi-disciplinary care. Thalassaemia was once a fatal disease of childhood or adolescence but has now 
become a chronic manageable condition due to the therapeutic advances of the past decades and the 
systematization of patient care. As a result, the survival of patients, with access to modern therapy and 
monitoring, tends to reach that of the normal population [11]. In parallel, prevention programs have limited the 
number of affected births [12]. Still, β-thalassaemia remains a very demanding medical condition, requiring 
intensive, multidisciplinary and lifelong care [8]. For more information see Chapters on Prevention, Iron Overload, 
MRI and Multidisciplinary Care. 
Thalassaemia patients and their families along with the many different healthcare professionals involved in 
their management, currently face a number of important challenges. These challenges are described briefly 
below. 
 
Current Challenges 
The complexity of thalassaemia clinical outcomes and care makes for complex clinical records, for which an 
electronic recording system is ideal. The ageing of patients also requires data collection over long periods of 
time, which again requires an electronic system for storing and processing. 
Equal access to modern systematic therapy and monitoring for all thalassaemia patients across the world 
remains the primary unmet need. Despite the global distribution of the disorder, the majority of thalassaemia 
patients are born and live in areas of emerging or developing economies [10], where disease management 
programmes are often absent or suboptimal. As a result, patients living in these areas are deprived of at least 
some, if not all, of the important pillars of current thalassaemia management including regular blood 
transfusions, chelation therapy, iron overload monitoring, multidisciplinary care and others, which impacts 
adversely their prognosis and survival. For more information, see Chapter on Unmet Needs. 
The global epidemiology of thalassaemias is a rapidly changing one due to the current refugee crisis. Many 
patients originating from high-prevalence areas of the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Africa have migrated or 
are in a process of migration to European countries. As a result, the number of patients with haemoglobin 
disorders located in Europe is significantly increasing. However, haemoglobinopathies in Europe fall within the 
official EU definition for RD and thus thalassaemias’ prioritization in national health agendas remains low. In 
this context, TIF has launched the THALassaemia In Action (THALIA) project, funded by the EU Commission, to 
promote prioritization of thalassaemia in national healthcare plans and policies in Europe [13]. 
The absence of adequate disease management programmes in several high-prevalence regions is coupled with 
the lack of systematic patient recording. This leads to insufficient epidemiological data on disease prevalence, 
clinical features, incidence of complications, management and outcomes. The existing evidence on the current 
global and regional burden of the disease remains suboptimal. This in turn precludes the accurate description 
of unmet needs, which further prevents proper adaptation of healthcare policies, research and advocacy to 
address these needs. 
As previously stated, advances in therapeutic and monitoring modalities and the systematization of care 
accomplished over the past decades have considerably improved the prognosis and survival of thalassaemia 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
413 
patients. As a result, patients having access to organized disease management programmes have entered a 
new era of prolonged survival. This accomplishment, however, comes at the cost of a changing clinical spectrum 
with increasing incidence of age-related disorders that were once unknown to thalassaemia populations [11]. 
The evolving clinical spectrum of the disease requires proper adaptations to management programmes that 
need to take into account the risk of conditions related to ageing. 
Despite the therapeutic advances of the past decades that have dramatically changed patients’ prognosis, the 
thalassaemias remain a field of rigorous research. Novel drugs that improve patient outcomes have lately been 
approved or are under investigation. Luspatercept, a recently FDA/EMA authorized drug, has been shown to 
improve ineffective erythropoiesis, the hallmark of thalassaemia’s pathophysiology, thus leading to improved 
haemoglobin levels and significantly reduced transfusion needs in a phase III clinical trial [14] and based on this 
the drug has gained approval and is in clinical use 
Other new therapies are in an earlier stage of development [15]. Besides new drugs for disease management, 
a fascinating new era of cure may emerge by virtue of the recent advances in gene therapy [16]. However, even 
if they are cost-effective in the long term, new therapies increase significantly the immediate costs of disease-
related healthcare. Given the high cost of these new additions, coverage by healthcare systems is not secured, 
even in high-income countries. Registries can help in patient selection and best utilisation of resources. 
The provision of regular care that is vital for patients’ survival and wellbeing, such as blood transfusions, should 
not be interrupted or jeopardized as a result of emergencies such as the COVID-19 pandemic, with reallocation 
of healthcare resources. Therefore, the proper adaptation of care during the current and potential future public 
health emergencies is crucial [17]. 
 
Expected Benefits from Registries 
Registries can play a major role in addressing the aforementioned challenges. They constitute the ideal tool for 
the generation of accurate and updated data on disease burden, features, management and outcomes at local, 
national, regional and global level. Collected data may concern the prevalence of the disease, the demographic 
and clinical characteristics of patients, the natural history of the disease (including the incidence of 
complications and the prevalence of comorbidities), the applied therapeutic and monitoring modalities, the 
organization of care and the outcomes of patients (including both hard clinical endpoints but also patient 
reported outcomes). These pieces of evidence allow the evaluation and benchmarking of quality and 
appropriateness of provided healthcare services, the detection of insufficiently covered clinical needs, including 
unaddressed comorbidities or complications, but also the degree of adherence to recommendations, and the 
identification of inequalities in healthcare delivery. 
Registry derived evidence would provide valuable feedback to all implicated stakeholders. More specifically, 
governments, healthcare authorities and policymakers will be able to understand the need for prioritization of 
thalassaemia care, to gauge the performance of thalassaemia care, to plan improvements to provided services 
and to balance the allocation of resources. Physician associations and scientific bodies would be facilitated in 
developing clinical practice guidelines and plan training programmes for physicians but also in issuing proper 
recommendations addressed to healthcare authorities, researchers and the pharma industry [3]. 
Regulatory authorities would be able to prioritize drug approval in the field of thalassaemia and organize more 
efficient post-approval pharmacovigilance programmes. The pharma industry will be able to prioritize 
investments in the demanding field of thalassaemia. Researchers will be provided with updated 
epidemiological evidence and large sample sizes to analyse, while they will further be facilitated in the 
generation of clinical hypotheses for new therapeutic targets, drugs and interventions, be supported in the 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
414 
conduct of clinical trials by the low cost, rapid enrolment, efficient follow-up and enhanced generalizability of 
results that registry-based trials provide [2, 3, 18]. 
Last but not least, patient organization and advocacy groups will have the necessary evidence at hand to better 
advocate patient needs, but also to promote the education of patients and families. Well-informed patients and 
families are empowered to better handle the disease, help other patients, and claim the improvement of their 
care. The endpoint is the improvement of patient outcomes through the enhancement of healthcare quality. 
Table 2 summarizes the expected benefits from thalassaemia registries and Figure 1 depicts the central role of 
registries in the interactions among all stakeholders implicated in the healthcare of thalassaemia patients. 
 
Table 2. Main areas and issues related to thalassaemia healthcare where registries are expected to contribute 
Epidemiology 
• 
Current disease burden at local, national, regional and global levels 
• 
Changing epidemiology due to current refugee crisis and migration 
flows 
Organisation and 
Provision of Care 
• 
Evaluation and benchmarking of provided healthcare services  
• 
Update of healthcare services, reprogramming of resource 
allocation  
• 
Changing clinical spectrum due to ageing 
• 
Unmet needs in developing/low-income countries (e.g., prevention 
programmes, access to regular transfusions and iron chelation, 
established multidisciplinary care, and social support)   
• 
Unmet needs in medium/high-income countries (e.g., access to 
latest developments, access of refugees and migrants to care) 
Research 
• 
Research collaboration, large sample sizes 
• 
Generation of research hypotheses, identification of treatment 
targets 
• 
Randomised trials with low cost, rapid enrolment, efficient follow-
up & increased generalisability 
Advocacy 
• 
Unmet needs in developing/low-income countries  
• 
Unmet needs in high-income countries 
Public Health Emergencies 
& Crises 
• 
Implications for thalassaemia patients 
• 
Proper & timely response of healthcare providers and authorities 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
415 
 
 
Figure 1. Central role of thalassaemia registries in the interactions among all stakeholders implicated in the 
healthcare of thalassaemia patients 
 
Existing Thalassaemia Registries 
In a study of thalassaemia registries across the world, published in 2019, Noori and colleagues were able to 
identify 16 different thalassemia registries, developed between 1984 and 2016 [19]. The majority of these 
registries are national, while only one is multinational and 2 are regional. Most of the identified registries rely 
on government funding, while a small number receive funding from the industry. Six of 16 registries are focused 
on thalassaemia, while the rest also include patients with sickle cell disease and other haemoglobinopathies. In 
contrast to the geographical distribution of thalassaemia, the majority of these registries are based in European 
countries, while the authors were not able to identify any thalassaemia registry in Africa. Recently, the Sickle 
Pan Africa Research Consortium (SPARCO) reported results from the first African registry on sickle cell disease 
from 3 countries, Nigeria, Ghana and Tanzania [20]; however, this registry does not include thalassaemia 
patients, in accordance with the epidemiology of haemoglobinopathies in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition to 
the above registries, we were able to identify another one in Malaysia [21].  
Thalassaemia Registries 
Generation of accurate, updated, real world evidence on local, national, regional, global level 
Data on disease & 
comorbidity, 
prevalence & 
complication 
incidence 
Data on access to 
therapeutic & 
monitoring 
modalities & 
management 
Data on outcomes 
(clinical endpoints, 
patient reported 
outcomes) 
Data on 
demographic 
characteristics, 
clinical features & 
disease natural 
Documentation of actual disease burden 
evaluation & benchmarking of provided 
healthcare Detection of unmet need 
Identification of inequalities in healthcare 
Governments, 
healthcare, 
authorities, policy 
makers 
Scientific societies 
& physician 
associations 
Regulatory bodies 
Researchers 
Pharma Industry 
Patient organizations 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
416 
The authors of the aforementioned report identified a considerable heterogeneity among the existing 
thalassaemia registries [19]. They serve diverse objectives and goals, they use various data sources and types, 
they rely on different information, standardization and management systems, they are governed by diverse 
models, and they have been developed in different languages. Table 3 summarizes the features of the existing 
thalassaemia registries. 
 
Table 3. Existing thalassaemia registries (Modified from Noori T. et al., Acta Inform Med 2019;27:58–63.19) 
Registry 
Country or 
Region 
Geographical 
Coverage 
Disease 
Coverage 
Launch 
Year 
Europe 
Sicilian Registry Thalassaemia & 
Haemoglobinopathies (ReSTE) 
Sicily, Italy 
Local 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD, Other 
1984 
European Haemoglobinopathy 
Registry (HER) 
UK/Europe 
Regional 
Thalassaemia, 
Other 
2004 
National Registry for Thalassaemia 
France 
National 
Thalassaemia 
2005 
Italian Multiregional Thalassaemia 
Registry (HTA-THAL Registry) 
Italy 
National 
Thalassaemia 
2008 
National Haemoglobinopathy Registry 
(NHR) 
UK 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2009 
National Registry of Patients with 
Thalassaemia in Greece (NRHG) 
Greece 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD, Other 
2009 
National Registry of Patients with 
Thalassaemia in Bulgaria 
Bulgaria 
National 
Thalassaemia 
2009 
Turkish Society of Pediatric 
Hematology National 
Hemoglobinopathy Registry 
Turkey 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2012 
Spanish Registry of 
Haemoglobinopathies (REHem) 
Spain 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2014 
Asia 
National Thalassaemia Registry (NTR) 
Singapore 
National 
Thalassaemia 
1992 
National registry of Symptomatic 
Haemoglobinopathies 
Oman 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2000 
Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry 
Malaysia 
National 
Thalassaemia 
2007 
Pediatric Non-Malignant Blood 
Disorders Registry 
Saudi Arabia 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2008 
Electronic Thalassaemia Registry 
Mazandaran (ETR Mazandaran) 
Mazandaran 
Province, 
Northen Iran 
Local 
Thalassaemia 
2016 
Punjab Thalassaemia Prevention 
Programme (PTPP), Ministry of Health 
Punjab 
Punjab, 
Pakistan 
National 
Thalassaemia 
2022 
North America 
Registry and Surveillance System for 
Hemoglobinopathies (RuSH) 
USA 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2010 
Data Information System for 
Hemoglobinopathies (DISH) 
Canada 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD 
2014 
Oceania 
Haemoglobinopathy Registry (HeR) 
Australia 
National 
Thalassaemia, 
SCD, Other 
2014 
*SCD: Sickle Cell Disease 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
417 
Comments 
The Paediatric non-malignant blood disorders registry is not at this time functioning as a national registry 
according to a virtual meeting with haematology experts from Saudi Arabia in November 2022. 
Thalassaemia support associations have in some countries developed their own registries. In Indonesia the 
Yayasan Foundation has attempted to cover the whole country. In Bangladesh the Thalassemia Foundation 
Hospital has an internal registry, which in 2021 included 4373 patients (most have Hb E Beta Thalassemia 3042 
and Beta Thalassemia 
890). These may evolve to national registries with governmental support.  
One approach suggested by a team from the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
CDC, USA, is to extract useful information from administrative healthcare data sets as a unique means to study 
healthcare use among people with SCD or thalassemia because of the ability to examine large sample sizes at 
fairly low cost, resulting in greater generalizability than is the case with clinic-based data. Such datasets include: 
• 
Hospital Data Sets which include data on hospitalisations, emergency department and ambulatory 
clinic data, as well as inpatient records. 
• 
Health Insurance Claims Databases since both public and private health insurance plans maintain 
detailed records on healthcare use and expenditures. 
Administrative data have both strengths and limitations for health services research on hemoglobinopathies 
and other blood disorders. The main advantages are the large numbers of observations and the low cost of data 
acquisition. However, the inability to validate information in diagnoses by reference to medical records. The 
diagnostic codes used for administrative purposes might not meet the diagnostic criteria used for surveillance 
case definitions, codes for underlying conditions might not be reported, or codes might be applied incorrectly 
by those recording data. These datasets provide a source for better understanding of the magnitude of the 
public health and economic effects of these conditions [22]. 
 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: A CALL FOR ACTION 
Challenges of Thalassaemia Registries 
The amount and complexity of data that are collected for each thalassaemia patient and the length of time that 
records are kept render the definition of the exact use of each registry and the type and amount of data to be 
included quite challenging. The existing thalassaemia registries are characterized by considerable 
heterogeneity. These inconsistencies may pose significant barriers to the interoperability of registries, the 
sharing and pooling of data and the overall coordination of similar concurrent initiatives, as well as the future 
re-use of data for different purposes, including administration, planning, research and advocacy. In addition, 
the provided geographic coverage is incomplete, as most registries are based in European countries. 
It is important that registries provide longitudinal data in a continuous manner, which allows the provision of 
updated evidence and the identification of trends in disease epidemiology, management and outcomes. An 
additional challenge that thalassaemia registries may face in this regard is their long-term sustainability, which 
is directly related to the sources of funding. Hitherto, thalassaemia registries are funded mostly by 
governments, with considerable work load being covered by  on a volunteer basis, often by clinic staff [19]. 
Therefore, continuation of public funding and voluntary work is crucial, while complementary sources of 
financial support should be attracted in parallel by contacting other public or private bodies, humanitarian 
organizations or the pharmaceutical industry. The particularly active thalassaemia patient organizations and 
advocacy groups have to play an important role in this regard. 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
418 
Technical challenges are also important. Pooling data from different registries is necessary to reach large 
numbers of patients and allow comparisons among different populations. This is particularly relevant to 
thalassaemia registries, since several ones are already in place in different parts of the world. At the same time, 
linking registries with existing electronic medical records and administrative healthcare databases would 
ensure exploitation of large amounts of representative data at a low cost and workload while avoiding 
inaccuracies in data entry. However, linking data from different databases with diverse language, structure and 
software protocols requires proper technical support and collaboration [23]. As previously stressed, the existing 
thalassaemia registries are quite heterogeneous. 
Ethical issues are also involved and should be taken under consideration during the design and implementation 
of a registry. All patients enrolled in a registry should give their consent for the collection, recording, storage 
and future processing, and potential sharing of their data, after being fully informed about the aims of the 
registry. At the same time, confidentiality and safety of data should be ensured by applying the proper protocols 
in compliance with national and international regulations for the protection of personal data. For example, the 
recent European Union Data Protection Regulation has set clear principles that apply to all use of patients’ data 
and to all data controllers (article 5 of the regulation) [24]. 
 
Harmonisation and Quality Assurance 
In an effort to address the heterogeneities of existing registries and ensure the overall quality of registries, the 
Italian National Center for Rare Diseases has recently issued a list of recommendations [2]. These 
recommendations constitute a quality assurance framework and concern 9 sequential areas of activities 
including (i) governance, (ii) data sources, (iii) data elements, (iv) information technology (IT) infrastructure, (v) 
data quality, (vi) information, (vii) documentation, (viii) staff training, and (ix) audit [2]. These recommendations 
are particularly relevant for thalassaemia registries and provide a solid ground for their harmonization and 
quality assurance. Table 4 provides an overview of these recommendations. 
 
Table 4. Recommendations of the Italian National Centre of Rare Diseases for quality assurance and management 
of registries [2] 
 
Main Areas 
Activities 
1 
Governance 
• 
Define registry objectives 
• 
Determine database structure 
• 
Involve all relevant stakeholders  
• 
Build a registry team 
• 
Ensure compliance with relevant ethical & legal rules 
• 
Ensure start-up budget and complementary sources 
2 
Data Source 
• 
Select primary & secondary data sources  
• 
Define inclusion/exclusion criteria 
• 
Ensure representativeness 
3 
Data Elements 
• 
Define data types according to objectives 
• 
Determine what data from each source 
• 
Build proper case report forms 
• 
Ensure use of standardization systems (e.g. disease classification, 
phenotype descriptions etc) 
4 
IT Infrastructure 
• 
Ensure compliance with FAIR principles: 
o 
Findable 
o 
Accessible 
o 
Interoperable 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
419 
 
Main Areas 
Activities 
o 
Reusable 
5 
Data Quality 
• 
Establish regular central and local monitoring  
• 
Programme regular quality reporting 
6 
Data Information 
• 
Define statistical analysis plan 
• 
Ensure dissemination to all stakeholders 
7 
Documentation 
• 
Determine documentation to ensure transparency 
8 
Training 
• 
Ensure systematic training of: 
o 
Registry staff 
o 
Data providers 
9 
Audit 
• 
Develop an audit system 
• 
Define red flags and audit triggers 
 
New Registries 
Pakistan (Punjab) the first Electronic Medical Registry of thalassaemia of patients living in the Punjab is now 
established. This was created in collaboration with the Specialized HealthCare & Medical Education 
Department of the Ministry of Health of Punjab and with the help of the Punjab Information Technology Board 
(PITB). It includes data from 64 treatment centres (government and NGO run) in 9 regions of the Punjab. 12536 
patients are included in the registry out of an estimated 21431 total number (58.5%) so far. The package includes 
a Registration Module (demographics), a Clinical Module and a treatment module 
 
CONCLUSION 
TIF’s e-Registry Initiative 
Umbrella organizations like TIF have a crucial role to play in the coordination of different registry initiatives. 
Such an organization can bring together existing thalassaemia registries across the globe, establish registry 
standards to support cohesion and interoperability across registries, develop strategies to attract sustainable 
funding from government and other public or private sources to support the existing and promote the 
development of new registries, with particular focus on areas and countries of emerging economy and to 
promote the use of registry data for translational research to address current gaps in knowledge and improve 
patients’ care [3]. In addition, patient-driven organizations such as TIF can ensure that patients will play an 
important in the development and exploitation of disease registries by incorporating data related to patients’ 
perspective such as patient-related outcomes, as well as the use of registry findings to inform and support 
patients’ advocacy. 
TIF has long recognized the need for a well-coordinated initiative towards the development of an international, 
truly representative and quality thalassaemia registry as well as the role that an umbrella organization has to 
play in this regard. In this context, TIF has previously contributed to the development of an electronic registry 
system for the purposes of the European Network on Rare Anaemias (ENERCA) with the aim to serve as an 
epidemiological tool to improve the management of patient services and ultimately improve patient care [25]. 
Later on, TIF conceived and launched a project for the design, development and implementation of an 
electronic, web-based platform to host a global thalassaemia registry. The specific aims of this project were 
defined as follows: 
 
 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
420 
• 
To generate reliable national and international epidemiological data.  
• 
To identify and document the unmet clinical needs regarding the care of patients with 
haemoglobinopathies in order to plan and improve the provided services. 
• 
To provide a structured approach to history taking, physical examination and evaluation of a 
haemoglobinopathy patient in order to enhance the clinical management of the disease. 
• 
To allow the efficient sharing of records within a thalassaemia unit or between disparate units thus 
enhancing physicians’ interaction to improve healthcare provision. 
• 
To promote and coordinate multidisciplinary care. 
• 
To provide a platform for national and international networking for clinical and research purposes. 
• 
To enhance physicians’ supervision and auditing.  
• 
To address medico-legal and ethical issues. 
• 
To promote awareness, education and training on haemoglobinopathies. 
 
TIF’s e-Registry aims at recruiting consecutive patients treated in thalassaemia centres across the world. To 
perform this task, TIF designed and developed a dedicated proprietary web-based electronic platform that 
combines the features of a structured electronic medical record and the features of a medical database for data 
process and research use. This application complies with international security and data safety protocols 
regarding web-based electronic medical records and web-based medical databases, also safeguarding subject 
anonymization. To ensure widespread access, this application is accessed by common web browsing software, 
while an additional application for portable devices will be developed at a later stage. A pilot-phase project for 
the testing of the platform has already been launched. Feedback from this pilot project will be used to evaluate 
and update the platform structure and functions. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
421 
REFERENCES 
1. 
R. E. Gliklich and N. A. Dreyer, Eds., 
Registries 
for 
evaluating 
patient 
outcomes: a user’s guide, Third edition. in 
AHRQ publication, no. no. 13(14)-EHC111. 
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health 
and 
Human 
Services, 
Agency 
for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, 2014. 
2. Y. Kodra et al., ‘Recommendations for 
Improving the Quality of Rare Disease 
Registries’, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. 
Health, vol. 15, no. 8, Art. no. 8, Aug. 2018, 
doi: 10.3390/ijerph15081644. 
3. 
P. Lacaze et al., ‘Rare disease registries: a 
call to action’, Intern. Med. J., vol. 47, no. 
9, 
pp. 
1075–1079, Sep. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1111/imj.13528. 
4. European 
Medicines Agency 
(EMA), 
‘Patient registries’. Accessed: Jul. 09, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory-overview/post-
authorisation/patient-registries 
5. S. Gosavi and A. Bhagavat, ‘Use of Chronic 
Disease 
Registries 
to 
Optimize 
Cardiovascular 
Health’, 
Curr. 
Vasc. 
Pharmacol., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 426–431, 
Jan. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.2174/1570161114666160722114413. 
6. ‘National Disease Registration Service 
(NDRS)’, NHS England Digital. Accessed: 
Jul. 
09, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://digital.nhs.uk/services/national-
disease-registration-service 
7. 
European Organisation for Rare Diseases 
(EURORDIS), National Organization for 
Rare Disorders (NORD), and Canadian 
Organization for Rare Disorders (CORD), 
‘EURORDIS-NORD-CORD: 
Joint 
Declaration of 10 Key Principles for Rare 
Disease Patient Registries’. Accessed: Jul. 
09, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://download2.eurordis.org/documen
ts/pdf/EURORDIS_NORD_CORD_JointD
ec_Registries_FINAL.pdf 
8. A Short Guide for the Management of 
Transfusion-Dependent 
Thalassaemia, 
2nd Edition. Thalassaemia International 
Federation, 2022. Accessed: Jul. 09, 2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://thalassaemia.org.cy/publications/t
if-publications/a-short-guide-for-the-
management-of-transfusion-dependent-
thalassaemia-2022/ 
9. A. Inati-Khoriaty, Sickle Cell Disease. 
Thalassaemia International Federation. 
Accessed: 
Jul. 
09, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://thalassaemia.org.cy/publications/t
if-publications/sickle-cell-disease-2008/ 
10. B. Modell and M. Darlison, ‘Global 
epidemiology of haemoglobin disorders 
and derived service indicators’, Bull. World 
Health Organ., vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 480–487, 
Jun. 2008, doi: 10.2471/BLT.06.036673. 
11. D. 
Farmakis, 
A. 
Giakoumis, 
M. 
Angastiniotis, and A. Eleftheriou, ‘The 
changing epidemiology of the ageing 
thalassaemia populations: A position 
statement 
of 
the 
Thalassaemia 
International 
Federation’, 
Eur. 
J. 
Haematol., vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 16–23, Jul. 
2020, doi: 10.1111/ejh.13410. 
12. J. Old et al., Prevention of Thalassaemias 
and Other Haemoglobin Disorders, 2nd 
Edition., 
vol. Volume 
1: 
Principles. 
Thalassaemia International Federation, 
2013. Accessed: Jul. 09, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://thalassaemia.org.cy/publications/t
if-publications/prevention-of-
thalassaemias-and-other-haemoglobin-
disorders-vol-1-2nd-edition-2013/ 
13. Thalassaemia International Federation, 
‘THALassaemia In Action: The THALIA 
project’, TIF. Accessed: Jul. 09, 2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://thalassaemia.org.cy/thalassaemia
-in-action-the-thalia-project/ 
14. M. D. Cappellini et al., ‘A Phase 3 Trial of 
Luspatercept in Patients with Transfusion-
Dependent β-Thalassemia’, N. Engl. J. 
Med., vol. 382, no. 13, pp. 1219–1231, Mar. 
2020, doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1910182. 
15. C. Casu et al., ‘Minihepcidins improve 
ineffective 
erythropoiesis 
and 
splenomegaly in a new mouse model of 
THALASSAEMIA REGISTRIES: 
A CALL FOR ACTION - A REPORT OF THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION 
422 
adult 
β-thalassemia 
major’, 
Haematologica, vol. 105, no. 7, pp. 1835–
1844, 
Jul. 
2020, 
doi: 
10.3324/haematol.2018.212589. 
16. A. A. Thompson et al., ‘Gene Therapy in 
Patients with Transfusion-Dependent β-
Thalassemia’, N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 378, 
no. 16, pp. 1479–1493, Apr. 2018, doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1705342. 
17. D. Farmakis, A. Giakoumis, L. Cannon, M. 
Angastiniotis, and A. Eleftheriou, ‘COVID-
19 
and 
thalassaemia: 
A 
position 
statement 
of 
the 
Thalassaemia 
International 
Federation’, 
Eur. 
J. 
Haematol., vol. 105, no. 4, pp. 378–386, 
2020, doi: 10.1111/ejh.13476. 
18. J. Parissis, D. Farmakis, and F. Triposkiadis, 
‘Heart failure registries: how far can we 
go?’, Eur. J. Heart Fail., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 
626–628, 2016, doi: 10.1002/ejhf.565. 
19. T. Noori et al., ‘International Comparison 
of Thalassemia Registries: Challenges and 
Opportunities’, Acta Inform. Medica, vol. 
27, no. 1, pp. 58–63, Mar. 2019, doi: 
10.5455/aim.2019.27.58-63. 
20. H. Isa et al., ‘Sickle Cell Disease Clinical 
Phenotypes in Nigeria: A Preliminary 
Analysis of the Sickle Pan Africa Research 
Consortium Nigeria Database’, Blood 
Cells. Mol. Dis., vol. 84, p. 102438, Sep. 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2020.102438. 
21. H. Mohd Ibrahim et al., ‘Observational 
study 
on 
the 
current 
status 
of 
thalassaemia in Malaysia: a report from 
the Malaysian Thalassaemia Registry’, 
BMJ Open, vol. 10, no. 6, p. e037974, Jun. 
2020, doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-037974. 
22. S. D. Grosse, S. L. Boulet, D. D. Amendah, 
and S. O. Oyeku, ‘Administrative Data Sets 
and 
Health 
Services 
Research 
on 
Hemoglobinopathies’, Am. J. Prev. Med., 
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. S557–S567, Apr. 2010, 
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2009.12.015. 
23. J. Schüz and M. Fored, ‘Chronic Disease 
Registries - Trends and Challenges’, 
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 328–
329, Aug. 2017, doi: 10.3414/ME17-14-
0004. 
24. EUR-Lex, ‘Document L:2016:119:TOC’, 
Off. J. Eur. Union, vol. Volume 59, May 
2016, Accessed: Jul. 09, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:L:2016:119:TOC 
25. Z. Antoniou, E. Schiza, K. Neokleous, M. 
Angastniotis, C. Pattichis, and C. Schizas, 
eHealth Services 
for 
the 
European 
Reference Network on Rare Anaemias 
(eENERCA), vol. 213. 2015, p. 156. doi: 
10.3233/978-1-61499-538-8-153. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
423 
 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
424 
13. THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
AUTHOR: Eleftheriou A. 
REVIEWER: Angastiniotis M. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last 10 years, healthcare systems as well as academic, research and industry stakeholders have been 
increasing their efforts to integrate the patient voice into their work and decisions being taken. 
The provision of a patient-centred element in a healthcare system requires the development of an environment 
that will truly foster engagement between patients and the healthcare team. 
Transforming healthcare in the 21st Century is a difficult and an extremely challenging task due to the many 
intricate layers that form part of and influence the system.  Political, economic and cultural factors are often 
constrained by value conflicts and resistance to change. In 2013, an international patient movement referred to 
as ‘Patient Revolution’ was established to enlist patients who live and experience the healthcare system on an 
everyday basis to help in designing care services that were better suited to their collective needs. Such 
initiatives mirror actions launched in other fields that rely on citizen science methods. The collective intelligence 
of large groups of people has been known to help address complex problems more effectively. 
 
 
 
The valuable contribution of patients has been demonstrated through a number of published studies in addition 
to unpublished information, including that compiled by patient-oriented organisations such as the 
Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) through their work with patients. TIF for example, has worked 
since 1986 with patients in different parts of the world, in countries with different economies, different 
health and social care systems, cultures, religions and social beliefs and has evidenced the invaluable 
contribution of the patients’ active involvement in achieving significant improvements in care policies.  
Patients often have great insight into many aspects within the healthcare provision and how services directly 
and indirectly can substantially affect the care they receive. They are essential key players in assessing service 
needs and are instrumental in finding ways in which these can be improved. It is necessary thus to discover and 
leverage the huge untapped resource of patients’ knowledge and experience to better understand and 
recognize those components of their care that are less than obvious to medical specialists. One of the most 
important drivers for change is to promote and implement a sort of ‘cultural shift’ on the part of medical 
specialists, clinicians and scientists, in order to eventually forget the outdated image of a patient under the 
paradigm of paternalistic medicine. This shift will lead to the acceptance of what has been clearly demonstrated 
nowadays by many qualified ‘expert patients’; that their involvement constitutes an added value to healthcare 
system improvements. In the field of haemoglobin disorders many paediatricians and haematologists across 
the world from the old school are still involved and lead patients’ organisations, thus this change is difficult to 
achieve. Specialists in many fields of the healthcare system, in regulatory and decision-making institutions, 
have reported how important the full involvement of patients can be for implementing inspired and creative 
Engaging patients with chronic conditions, such as those living with haemoglobin disorders, will 
contribute significantly to the identification of those components (including quality standards and 
protocols of care) that require improvement and aid in the development of new initiatives that may 
positively impact patient care and improve their overall quality of life. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
425 
outcomes with a mutual benefit. It has been shown in almost every hospital, clinic or centre that has been 
successful in reforming and improving care services particularly those aimed for chronic patients, including 
those living with haemoglobin disorders, that top-down strategies related to restructuring of the care services 
are not the sole proponents to improving the quality of care. The creation of a truly patient-centred care system 
is particularly favourable to the chronic, ‘frequent’ visitors of the services, such as the multiply transfused 
patients with haemoglobin disorders.  
An obvious outcome of their ‘satisfaction’ with health services provided to them for example is their better 
concordance to the often difficult, on many occasions painful, lifelong protocols of treatment they are 
receiving. Concordance to treatment, which is related to better survival and quality of life (Truglio-Londrigan et 
al., 2012; Náfrádi, Nakamoto & Schulz, 2017), has indeed been for many decades, and still is, amongst patients 
with transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (TDT), across all ages, sexes, of different educational levels, 
ethnicities and cultures across all regions of the world, a huge concern and a documented cause of negative 
clinical outcome (Gabutti & Piga, 1996; Vekeman et al., 2016). Better quality interaction between treating 
physicians and patients is significant in improving concordance (Zolnierek & Dimatteo, 2009), albeit competent 
health authorities should be interested and willing to facilitate such practices. For most high-income countries 
where advanced care is available and accessible to almost all patients, non-adherence to treatment protocols, 
particularly iron chelation therapy, constitutes an important and remaining challenge experienced by treating 
physicians.  
Good concordance with lifelong treatment protocols can only happen if and when the patient is truly pleased 
with all aspects of the care, he/she is receiving and when she/he is involved in the solution-finding processes. 
“Treatment is for living and not living to be treated” is a phrase often used by one of TIF’s leading patient 
advocates. Healthcare professionals should thus not wait for their institution or hospital or clinics to act in 
engaging patients in discussions, as they can identify together, in a timely manner, key areas of their care that 
can be improved without massive administrative intervention. 
 
 
Figure 1. The relation between adherence and concordance and outcomes demonstrated (Gabutti V, Piga A 1996) 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
426 
HOW ENGAGING PATIENTS CAN BE OF BENEFIT 
Engaging patients in identifying gaps and weaknesses in the care that is provided to them even when this is in 
accordance with disease specific guidelines, has proved a very strong tool for the Thalassaemia International 
Federation (TIF). This is particularly seen in, but not confined to, countries of the developing economies, where 
the absence or very limited existence of national registries, reference centres and published information could 
not facilitate TIF’s understanding of the challenges patients with haemoglobin disorders are facing in their 
individual countries. Obtaining a reliable picture of the situation of a country or a region or even part of a county 
with regards to the quality of care provided to chronic patients, can be extremely challenging without the active 
and meaningful involvement and participation of patient organisations themselves. Such information is crucial 
for TIF in order to support its work and to better tailor its activities, and projects at the national, regional and 
international level based on the needs and concerns as expressed by the patients themselves. Needless to 
underscore the fact that the contribution and collaboration of treating physicians and generally the healthcare 
professionals’ community in identifying gaps and in supporting the promotion of measures and policies for 
improvement through well-structured and documented recommendations to policymakers, remains 
invaluable.  
The different perspective between patients and physicians was very well described in an informal survey 
circulated among the members of the European Reference Network (ERN) for Haematological Diseases 
(EuroBloodNet). Taking place in the very early stages of the Networks establishment (in 2016), it was clearly 
shown that in the context of seeking their opinion on the structure of the network what was mostly relevant for 
patients was less important for clinicians and vice versa (unpublished data communicated by a patient 
representative involved in EuroBloodNet). This is to confirm that indeed every contribution is important for 
policymakers. 
 
ENGAGING PATIENTS IN THE WORK OF DECISION-
MAKERS AT NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL LEVELS 
Patient supported proposals for improvements may complement those of the national competent authorities 
and healthcare professionals and can (and indeed have been documented) to be of truly great value (Hertel et 
al., 2019; Bombard et al., 2018). In addition to national health authorities, patient involvement can be of benefit 
to regional or international health-related bodies including the World Health Organization (WHO). Patients’ 
views and perspectives can greatly facilitate the better understanding of the hugely heterogeneous unmet 
needs of patients with different chronic conditions, in a country, across countries, and across different regions 
of the world. WHO and other official health-related bodies are in need of reliable, real-world data to more 
effectively tailor their work and actions, including revisiting general health or disease-specific resolutions and 
recommendations with the support and interaction of their Member States. Data on policy-related outcomes 
cannot be obtained in the absence of patient involvement and without truly ‘capturing’ the patient perspective 
and position. 
 
The example of the European Union (EU) 
For many years now, in Europe a very strong effort has been undertaken to support rare diseases (RDs) through 
a number of European Union (EU) official recommendations, regulations, directives, and decisions. All of these 
include as a prerequisite for their preparation and later implementation at national level, the full and meaningful 
engagement of patients, and the clear expression of their position. In fact, the empowerment and recognition 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
427 
by the European Commission (EC) of the added value involved in addressing the huge unmet needs of RDs  
(Aymé, Kole & Groft, 2008) came into force initially in the 1990s from the active, persistent and very well-
structured engagement of RD patients themselves through their European umbrella association, the European 
Organisation for Rare Diseases (EURORDIS) (De Santis et al., 2019). The methodology used by the EU in 
interacting and collaborating with the patient, and the weight given to the patients’ position could indeed 
constitute a fine example of how official stakeholders can truly involve the patient perspective in decision-
making processes beyond Europe and across the world (TNS Qual+, 2012). 
 
Where and how patients can be engaged – examples 
In another field, engaging the patient’s perspective in developing new or in reforming existing official 
legislations and policies relevant mainly, but not confined to, health, social care and education, has proved in 
every case and in every country that has ‘allowed’ or encouraged such practices, extremely beneficial. The 
involvement of patients within healthcare provision has been in place for quite a long time in Cyprus, with the 
Pancyprian Thalassaemia Association in the lead since the 1960s. Patient involvement (PI) furthermore, was 
made mandatory in Cyprus in 2016 through a new law [46(I)/2016)] that officially recognised patients as a 
valuable and equal stakeholder to the government. This has allowed their full and active engagement in almost 
every step of the very extensive healthcare reforms that the government has undertaken to implement in 
recent years. The contribution of patient engagement has been extremely valuable and greatly appreciated by 
government and all other official stakeholders involved in these reforms, acknowledging the very fact that 
Cyprus was committed to establishing a new truly patient-centred healthcare system. 
Patients in many countries today are involved at different levels in national health committees that may be 
disease-specific and/or public health/ healthcare system related. 
The involvement of patients living with haemoglobin disorders in some countries across the world has resulted 
in the inclusion of their condition in a number of important disease-specific social, and where patients felt 
essential, disability-oriented policies/legislations including (and not confined to) early retirement, travel 
remuneration, quotas for university admission and employment and many others, different in each country. 
The engagement of patients in many, if not all, decision-making committees of the EU is mandatory and has 
thus contributed significantly to having truly patient-centred decisions, recommendations, directives and 
regulations. The participation of patients is clearly described in most of these, and an illustrative example is the 
European Directive (transposed into the national legislation of every EU Member State) 2011/24/EU (and its two 
Addenda 2014/286/EU and 2014/287/EU) for safeguarding the rights of patients with RDs in obtaining cross-
border healthcare. In this, the establishment of the European Reference Networks (ERNs) for RDs (including 
rare anaemias and haemoglobin disorders) constitutes a key recommendation and full patient involvement is a 
prerequisite. 
One must not ignore that further to the patient’s wellbeing and social integration, which constitute the two 
major goals for an effective health and social care system in a country, practices which involve the patient’s 
perspective contribute greatly to the system’s sustainability through for example their participation in Health 
Technology Assessment (HTA) bodies (Single et al., 2019) and which in many instances, has been pivotal for 
price negotiations of many available expensive drugs. 
A 2019 Deloitte Report on patient access to innovative medicines in Europe (Deloitte Centre for Health 
Solutions, 2019), points out that early dialogue and partnership with regulatory and important stakeholders 
including patients can provide a number of benefits to all and can aid pharma product pricing. Similarly, outside 
Europe, pharma organisations, more and more in current years, are engaging with payers and patients earlier, 
in much more constructive, collaborative and valuable ways. Such engagement helps pharma develop products 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
428 
that meet the priorities of the healthcare system and the unmet needs of patients and importantly enter into 
pricing negotiation to model and discuss a variety of potential contracting solutions to achieve market access.  
New innovative drug products and therapies need to be made available and to reach the patients in a timely 
way particularly those with RDs. 
The European-based pharmaceutical industry has attempted in 2015 a qualitative interview study to identify 
the value and challenges of Patient Involvement (PI). In the conclusions of this work, many were uncertain about 
when, how and which patients to involve (Parsons et al., 2016). 
Patients and the public's lack of knowledge and interest in medicines R&D, and the pharmaceutical industry's 
lack of knowledge, interest and receptivity to PI were believed to be key challenges to increasing PI. 
Interviewees also believed that relationships between the pharmaceutical industry, patient organisations, 
patients and the public needed to change to facilitate PI in medicines R&D. Existing pharmaceutical industry 
codes of practice and negative media reporting of the pharmaceutical industry were also seen as negative 
influences on these relationships. 
Along the lines of this argument, the authors of a 2018 publication (Levitan et al., 2018) argue that risk-adjusted 
financial models can actually assess the impact of patient engagement particularly in the context of clinical 
trials. A combination of empirical data and subjective parameter estimates shows that engagement activities 
with the potential to avoid protocol amendments and/or improve enrolment, adherence and retention may add 
considerable financial value. 
In the context of the new Regulation (EU) No. 536/2014 for clinical trials of medicinal products for human use, 
there is (in addition to many other benefits) a significant increase in transparency on clinical trial data and data 
generated with a greater involvement of the public and patients, with the mandatory introduction of a patient 
into the testing teams and the publication of a final report in language (Tenti et al., 2018) dedicated to the public 
and not the workforce.  
In more recent years, patients’ involvement along the whole chain of Research and Drug Development (R&D) 
has been greatly strengthened and placed on a more professional basis by the two major drug regulatory 
authorities and other official national bodies, including the European Medicines Agency (EMA), National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
There is unequivocal evidence collected by EMA (EMA, Stakeholders & Communication Division, 2014) and the 
FDA on the valued contribution of patients’ views and involvement in medicines R&D.  Already EMA, has taken 
significant steps in this direction through a number of its committees, in which patients participate including 
the Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP), Paediatric Committee (PDCO), the Committee for 
Advanced Therapies (CAT) and Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee (PRAC). In these bodies, 
patients’ representatives may assume the status of full members including having the right to vote for the 
drugs’ assessment and approval processes. Patients involved however, should be free from any conflict of 
interest and no association at any level with the pharma industries so as to ensure the unbiased nature and full 
transparency of the approval process. In 2018, EMA reported that one in five scientific advice procedures 
involved patients and the scientific committee members (SAWAP) considered that in almost every case, 
patients provided an added value to the scientific advice and in about one in four cases, the scientific advice 
recommended that the development plan be modified to reflect patient advice (EMA, 2019). 
The EMA is now proposing the fostering of earlier contact with patient/consumer organisations. It proposes to 
reach out to patients at the start of the evaluation of new Marketing Authorisation Application (MAAs) so that 
patients can share their experience and concerns about their condition(s) and key aspects that are important 
for them in order for this to be taken into account in a timely manner during the assessment process. Aspects 
that are of particular to patients/ carers such as quality of life, standard treatments on how acceptable they are, 
how these interfere with their lives, therapeutic unmet needs, what their expectations are with regards to the 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
429 
benefits they hope to have, the level of side effects they would consider acceptable. It will greatly facilitate the 
better understanding of whether there are large differences between groups of patients/carers of the same 
disease area or concerns are similar across the condition and certainly to note anything else that patients/carers 
feel is important for EMA to know (EMA/372554/2014-29/11/2020). 
Similarly, in 2012, as part of the reauthorization of the Prescription Drug Use Fee Act (PDUFA V), the FDA 
(Perfetto et al., 2015), established a programme to help ensure patients’ experiences, perspectives, needs and 
priorities are captured and meaningfully incorporated into the development and review process. This was 
formalized as Patient-Focused Drug Development (PFDD). A number of activities and meetings are involved in 
this novel approach so as to gather input from patients who are willing to share their personal experiences of 
living with a disease or condition. 
 
 
 
In this context, published literature even provides description of a possible roadmap of patient involvement (PI) 
across the whole spectrum of R&D life cycle (Figure 2) and key areas and opportunities for PI within early stage 
are identified (Geissler et al., 2017).  In the course of such involvement, both the patients and research scientists 
gain a number of different for each party benefits, some of which are mentioned below including for patients 
(A) and research (B): 
 
Table 1. Practical roadmap for patient involvement in medicine R&D. DIA Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory 
Science 2018. Vol 52(2) 220-229. Assessing the Financial Value of Patient Engagement: A Quantitative approach 
from CTTI’s Patient Groups and Clinical Trials Project 
A. Patients 
Gaining knowledge and research skills 
Increased understanding of the nature and purpose of a clinical trial 
Greater self-esteem and confidence of patient representation involved in the process 
Acceptance of patients as equal partners 
Utilising patient experience and knowledge of their condition, leading to development of 
healthcare and therapies that are more representative of patients’ needs 
B. Research 
Data and information exchange between users and industry during the post-marketing 
period and in the context of pharmacovigilance commitments 
Ensuring research and research outcomes address patients’ real unmet needs 
Increased response and participation rates 
 
Patients and patients’ organisations should be meaningfully engaged at all stages from defining 
research priorities to trial design, review of proposals, trial implementation and participation; indeed, 
this has become, especially in the last decade, a routine and in most cases a mandatory practice both 
by the academic research community and the industry. 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
430 
 
Figure 2. Practical roadmap for patient involvement in medicines R&D.DIA Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory 
Science 2018. Vol 52(2) 220-229. Assessing the Financial Value of Patient Engagement: A Quantitative Approach 
from CTTI’s Patient Groups and Clinical Trials Project 
 
It is true that many on the development side often fail to take into account real-world challenges when 
developing a clinical trial. They are more interested in determining the efficacy and safety of a drug rather than 
taking into consideration quality of life issues. The contribution of the patient’s perspective is in more recent 
years not only recognized but very importantly sought after and considered essential. The collection of real 
patient data, for example is a prerequisite in the context of certain types of authorization licenses granted by 
EMA and FDA and mainly regarding innovative drugs/therapies, which may be granted accelerated procedures 
or authorization under exceptional circumstances or conditional marketing authorization. 
These types of licenses are granted to address unmet medical needs of patients; either for patients with unmet 
needs, to facilitate their accelerated access to a new medicine, or because the drug cannot be approved under 
a standard authorization as comprehensive data cannot be obtained either due to disease rarity or because 
there are gaps in the scientific knowledge. These drugs are subject to specific post-authorisation obligation and 
monitoring, and they are authorized on the basis of less comprehensive data than normally required to address 
unmet medical needs. Although the applicant needs to present data that indicate that the medicine’s benefit 
outweighs its risk, the applicant should be in a position to provide the comprehensive clinical data in future. 
For such data to be collected, the continued, well-structured and coordinated patient engagement is absolutely 
essential. PI has steadily gained increased recognition, not only by the EU and the WHO which have since the 
early 1990s official collaboration with patient-oriented non-government organizations (NGOs), but also by an 
increasing number of national health authorities across all regions of the world. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
431 
An expert patient advocate, Jan Geissler, leading the EUPATI [European Patients’ Academy on Therapeutic 
Innovation - an excellent educational initiative originally launched by the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) 
and hosted by the European Patients’ Forum (EPF)], believes that “involving patients while designing trials and 
developing drugs will help so that non-scientific factors that are still crucial to evaluating a drugs’ efficacy can 
be taken into consideration” (Chakradhar, 2015). 
 
Engaging patients in educational programmes 
Significant progress has also been made by medical bodies with respect to the recognition of the value of 
engaging patients in their programmes, mainly educational ones. The European Haematology Association 
(EHA) is a fine example in the case of haematological diseases including haemoglobin disorders. Since 1992 
EHA has promoted in a very structured way (initially with scepticism and reservations to a certain level) a 
patients’ advocacy group (in which TIF participates), the work of which through the years has proved to be of 
added value to the work of EHA. In the 2018 the ‘EHA Research Roadmap on Haemoglobinopathies and 
Thalassaemia: An update’, includes “the development of Patient Reported Outcomes (PRO) tools to support 
the work and collaboration with patient organisations” amongst its key recommendations (Iolascon et al., 
2019). Such collaborations have developed through the years or are in development with other medically 
orientated groups including the International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT), the European Blood Alliance 
(EBA), the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) just to mention a few relevant to the work of 
TIF. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGING THE VALUE OF PATIENT OUTCOMES 
IN HEALTHCARE DELIVERY 
Patient reported outcomes are a major and invaluable tool developed to ‘capture’ in a more structured way 
patients’ information and views that can be appropriately analysed and assessed in order to better understand 
their needs and expectations for the health, social and other specialised care they are receiving (Lavallee et al., 
2016). 
Collecting patient experiences and expectations in routine care is crucial in developing services that focus on 
patient-centred care. Often, changes with regards to service provisions are made by those who have the best 
intentions but no true or life experiences of the condition. As a result, their perceived goals as to what their 
patients want may differ to that of those with live with the condition. Having pragmatic insights into patients' 
experiences of symptoms, quality of life, values, preferences and goals in life are essential in providing any 
healthcare service that is effective for a medical condition.  
Previously embraced in the research realm, patient-reported outcomes have started to play a role in successful 
shared decision making, which can enhance the safe and effective delivery of healthcare. Present and future 
challenges need to be analysed and examined so as to provide the opportunity to healthcare systems to 
maximize the use of patient-reported outcomes in the clinic/hospital. 
Reported outcomes as a tool, therefore, can be both disease-specific or general healthcare-oriented ones. They 
can play a role in shared decision-making which can in turn enhance safe and effective delivery of healthcare. 
Emerging practices consequent to patient reported outcomes have provided value to both patients and 
clinicians and have improved care services albeit this tool is not to date extensively applied. 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
432 
The key… 
However, the key to meaningful and productive patient involvement lies largely on the very good knowledge 
and often relevant experience that the patient has in the particular area he/she is assigned to interact. In this 
context, European umbrella organisations such as the European Patients' Forum (EPF), the European 
Organisation for Rare Diseases (EURORDIS) and a number of disease-specific organisations at the European 
level have been very actively involved in developing very comprehensive educational programmes for patients 
with different diseases on a variety of health, drug and other research related topics in collaboration with 
experts and other stakeholders, including the industry. These programmes aim at building a competent patient 
community that is knowledgeable enough to interact productively and advocate effectively for the rights in 
quality and safe care at all levels and importantly at decision-making level at country and European levels. 
It is also a useful field of research to assess patient knowledge of their condition, both to establish patient 
involvement but also to assess self –efficacy in dealing with the complex demands of their treatment [Kharyal 
R, Kumari V, Mrunalini VT, Naik M, Joshi P, Seth T. Disease Knowledge and General Self-Efficacy Among 
Adolescents with Thalassemia Major and Their Parents' Perspective. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2021 
Apr;37(2):280-286. doi: 10.1007/s12288-020-01335-3. PMID: 33867735] 
On the other hand, TIF, the International Alliance of Patients' Organizations (IAPO) and other international 
disease-specific organisations have been struggling for decades now in the international arena whilst actively 
involved in safeguarding patient safety, drug and blood safety and equity of all patients to quality health and 
social care. TIF, particularly since its establishment in 1986, with the development and continual updating and 
upgrading of its educational programmes, aims to strengthen the knowledge of patients across the world and 
‘transform’ them to valuable and equal partners at the decision-making level. 
TIF in this context has developed since 1989, an educational programme which is constantly strengthened and 
is based on three pillars: 
1. 
Preparation, publication, translation (into many languages) and distribution of educational and 
informational material: books/factsheets etc. 
2. The organisation of events: workshops, seminars, conferences, symposia, meetings, courses, 
fellowships 
3. 
The development of electronic educational platforms for patients and healthcare professionals and 
more currently the organisation of virtual educational events including webinars 
In addition, in more recent years, TIF established in 2019, the TIF Patient Advocacy Group (T-PAG) comprised of 
198 patient advocates from 62 countries. Many of these have developed adequate competency to actively 
advocate and interact productively at different levels of decision-making at the national, regional or 
international level, and still many others are under training and working mostly at the national level. This 
complements the vision of TIF to ‘create’ a large group of competent patient advocates across countries and 
regions of the world to make the voice and position of the patients with haemoglobin disorders when involved, 
strong and effective.  
Below Figure 3 and Tables 2, 3 & 4 describe TIF’s Patient Advocacy Group (T-PAG), its structure and membership 
(Figure 3), the eligibility criteria for the inclusion of patients (Table 2) and briefly their role as T-PAG members 
(Table 3) as well as TIF’s responsibilities in supporting their educational work and meaningful engagement at all 
levels (Table 3). 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
433 
 
Figure 3. TIF Patient Advocacy Group (T-PAG) for Thalassaemia & Sickle Cell Disease 
Table 2. Thalassaemia Patient Advocates Structure & Membership 
National T-PAG 
Regional T-PAG 
Global T-PAG: 
• 
1 -2 
patients 
from 
Pos in 
each 
country 
• 
Patients from National T-PAGs 
• 
10 – 30 persons (of varying profiles and 
expertise) from National T-PAGs of each 
Region 
• 
Regional Facilitator (RF) elected by Regional 
T-PAG Members. The RF also participates in 
Global T-PAG 
• 
12 members of TIF’s 
International Core 
Expert Patient Group 
(I-CEPG) 
• 
RF from each 
Regional T-PAG 
*PO = Patient Organisation 
WHO 
EURO 
WHO 
WPRO 
WHO 
EMRO 
WHO 
AFRO 
WHO 
AMRO 
WHO 
SEARO 
TPA-
GLOBAL 
TPA-
EURO 
TPA-
WPRO 
TPA-
EMRO 
TPA-
AFRO 
TPA-
AMRO 
TPA-
SEARO 
66 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
24 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
10 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
9 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
16 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
3 NATIONAL 
T-PAGs 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
434 
Table 3. TPA Programme 
Thalassaemia Patient Advocates (TPA) Programme: Eligibility Criteria 
✓ Be patients with thalassaemia or sickle cell disease 
✓ Are over 18 years of age 
✓ Belong to a National Thalassaemia Association, preferably 
✓ Understand the needs of patients both in the country, but also across the region, and globally (if 
he/she belongs to TPA-Global) 
✓ Understand TIF’s mission, vison, strategic objectives, plan of activities, policies and positions 
✓ Successfully completed the Thal e-course (scoring >80%) 
✓ Must acquire knowledge on drug development, clinical trials, drug regulatory affairs and research 
in the field through webinars, educational meetings and courses offered by TIF and others 
✓ Continue to enrich and consolidate the knowledge obtained through the Thal e-course through 
active involvement in webinars, personal communications and interviews initiated by TIF 
✓ Have knowledge of the health system public/private of the country they represent 
✓ Have knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of the clinical/social system of the country they 
represent 
 
Table 4. Thalassaemia Patient Advocates (TPA) Programme: 
Thalassaemia Patient Advocates (TPA) Programme: Responsibilities & Benefits of Participations 
The Roles of TPA Members 
i. 
To advocate for TIF’s mission and vision 
in accordance with TIF’s strategic 
objectives, through the materialisation 
of specific activities, in alignment with 
TIF policies and positions on a wide 
ranges of issues 
ii. 
Maintain an up-to-date understanding 
of the needs of patients both in their 
home country, but also across the 
region, and globally (if he/she belongs 
to TPA-Global) 
iii. 
May represent TIF in preassigned 
missions 
iv. 
Provide their opinion/perspective as 
patients, when this is requested, and 
participate in consultations on issues 
concerning haemoglobinopathies 
v. 
Be in close communication with the TIF 
Office, using official channels (i.e. 
email, fax, post) 
vi. 
Must discuss and receive the consent of 
TIF prior to undertaking any mission in 
the context of their role as TPA 
Members 
 
TIF’s Responsibilities Towards TPA Members 
i. 
Responses to communication received 
from TPA Members will not exceed 2 
working days 
ii. 
Sustain 
interaction 
with 
the TIF 
International 
Scientific 
Advisory 
Committee, 
seeking 
input 
and 
scientific knowledge in order to fulfil 
Responsibilities below 
iii. 
Ensure that the content of the Thal e-
course is up to date 
iv. 
Develop 
targeted 
and 
specific 
preparatory and/or training materials 
as required for TPA Members prior to 
each mission (event or visit) and 
consultation 
v. 
Organise 
and 
coordinate 
teleconferences with TPA Members to 
further 
explain 
the 
preparatory 
materials, ensure understanding and 
confirm alignment with TIF’s position 
on the matters to be discussed 
vi. 
Cover costs of any travelling or 
participation in meetings and events 
organised in the context of TPA 
 
*TPA Members are required to adhere to the Terms of Reference Agreement for CONFIDENTIALITY and 
COORDINATION 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
435 
Who really are patient advocates? 
Patient advocates can be defined as patients who have invested the time and energy needed to acquire a high 
level of disease-specific knowledge i.e. on the condition they represent, the research activity around it and the 
authorized for their condition of therapies/drugs. These are patients themselves who know and truly represent, 
the views of the patients, have a deep knowledge of their unmet needs as expressed by the patients they 
represent in their country. They certainly need to be well versed with the functioning and services offered by 
the healthcare system in their countries, as well as what is happening in countries of their region but also 
globally. To achieve this, they need to be aware of the work of official health-related bodies in the region and 
globally, including importantly the WHO, network with others in their country, region and internationally while 
keeping close and productive relations with the relevant healthcare professionals’ communities at all levels. The 
support of TIF to its members in the context of education and provision of reliable and updated information is 
immense and the collaboration of every National Thalassaemia Association (NTA) with TIF should be 
safeguarded and highly embraced. 
 
TIF AND ITS WORK ON PI 
TIF, since its establishment in 1986, has strongly advocated for patient engagement and respect to the patient’s 
perspective and position and has involved patients in every aspect of its work and activity at all levels. TIF was 
amongst the first, it not the first patient organization, that annually organized since 1989 patient associations 
meetings, what we today describe as ‘training programmes’ for improving patients’ knowledge, skills and 
competencies for advocacy. 
 
The NTA’s in the United Kingdom, Italy, Greece, Cyprus and the USA, founding members of TIF, are fine 
examples in exercising very active PI since the very early years of their establishment in the 1960s/1970s, and it 
is indeed the successful outcome of such involvement that gave TIF the strength and empowerment to extend 
this work across the world. Today, many patients through the 138 NTAs in 59 countries-members of TIF are 
actively involved at national, and some at regional level, and the outcomes of such involvement as reported to 
and evidenced by TIF, are very encouraging and in many cases truly impressive.  
 
Engagement of patients has been happening for many years now in the field of haemoglobin disorders, albeit 
in a less structured way and with greater scepticism and a slower pace in many countries outside Europe and 
other Western countries; however, the PI and its achievements in some of the developing countries are indeed 
quite remarkable. Patients must however continue to act through the strong, united voice of their national 
associations which bear the responsibility to build up educational programmes for strengthening the 
knowledge and advocacy skills of their patients, some of whom will reach an advocacy competency that would 
allow their interaction at national or international decision-making level. 
 
 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
436 
TIF as a patient umbrella association, through it work has achieved the establishment of very important 
collaborations with valuable stakeholders whose support is substantial for achieving its mission, including: 
✓ the World Health Organisation (WHO) with which it has been in official relations since 1996 
✓ the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) with which it has had an active consultative 
status since 2017 
✓ the European Commission as a strategic partner in the field of health since 2018 
✓ the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe as a member since 2019. 
In addition, throughout the years TIF has achieved the establishment of valuable collaborations and to network 
productively with over 200 medical/scientific national and international experts and with almost every relevant 
medical/scientific association or body. Importantly, TIF has gained the respect of competent national health 
authorities in more than 60 of its member-countries around the world; working with many in the context of 
special collaborations and/or official agreements. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
In conclusion, the national health/social and every other competent authority in a country, needs to invest in 
developing official, well-structured channels of PI at all levels of decision-making if the aim is to honour the 
many and important relevant resolutions/declarations signed by all members of the WHO and in achieving the 
UN 2030 SGD.  These include but are not confined to patient rights, universal health coverage, quality 
healthcare, respect for patients and human rights for equal access to quality health and other care and last 
but not least patient-centred healthcare systems across the globe. 
Very importantly, patients and families need to invest in strengthening their voice and impact through 
promoting the infrastructure, activities and networking of their national associations. TIF’s work towards 
strengthening the competency of NTAs has demonstrated that there is still considerable room for 
improvement in still a large number of NTAs within and across countries (Table 4). TIF has made an effort to 
score (based on specific parameters - Annex I) (Annex II) and subsequently grade the services of NTAs (Table 5). 
This work is only a gross assessment, based on the best knowledge and information available to TIF, and is only 
a basis for further work by NTAs, including more tailored TIF activities. It is noteworthy that being a TIF Full 
Member contributes to closer and more active collaboration with TIF and better investment of the NTAs in 
activities and advocacy for the best interest of their patients. Indeed, 28 / 34 NTAs that score 20 and over, and 
are graded as ‘A’, are TIF Full Members. From all parameters examined, TIF Full Membership stands out as the 
one factor related to greater interest and more active work on behalf of NTAs. The aspects of disease 
prevalence, political commitment and healthcare professional interest follow. National economic status and 
presence of other competing health priorities do not seem to contribute key factors to in the activeness and 
strength of national thalassaemia associations. 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
437 
Table 4. Summary of the implementation of TIF’s Grading System for Assessing the Activities of TIF Member 
Associations (as described in Annex I) 
Scoring Category/ 
Region 
A 
B 
C 
D 
Europe 
Azerbaijan,  
Cyprus, 
France, Greece, 
Italy, Netherlands, 
Turkey, United 
Kingdom 
Azerbaijan, 
Germany, Ireland, 
Portugal, Sweden, 
United Kingdom 
France 
Albania, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Germany, 
Israel, Italy, 
Luxembourg, 
Malta, Romania, 
Spain, Turkey 
Eastern 
Mediterranean 
Algeria, Egypt,  
Iran (Islamic Rep. 
of), Iraq, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Pakistan, 
Palestine 
(Occupied), Saudi 
Arabia, United 
Arab Emirates 
Egypt, Iran (Islamic 
Rep. of), Pakistan, 
Saudi Arabia, 
Yemen 
Iraq, Kuwait, 
Morocco, Pakistan, 
Saudi Arabia 
Afghanistan, 
Bahrain, Iran 
(Islamic Rep. of), 
Iraq, Pakistan, 
Palestine 
(Occupied), Sudan, 
Syria, Tunisia, 
United Arab 
Emirates, 
West Pacific 
Australia, Hong 
Kong SAR, 
Malaysia, Viet Nam 
Malaysia, 
Singapore 
Australia, 
Philippines, Taiwan 
(China) 
Cambodia, China, 
Malaysia, 
Philippines 
Southeast Asia 
Bangladesh, India, 
Indonesia, 
Maldives, Nepal 
Bangladesh, India, 
Sri Lanka, Thailand 
Bangladesh 
India, Maldives 
Americas 
Canada, Trinidad & 
Tobago, USA 
 
 
Argentina 
Africa 
Mauritius 
Ghana, Nigeria 
 
South Africa 
*Countries with more than 1 TIF Member Association are indicated more than once. 
 
Table 5. Scoring interpretation 
Scoring Category 
Interpretation 
A 
≥ 20 units 
Describes Thalassaemia Associations which have a strong patient voice, established 
national presence with educational and advocacy activities and continual 
communication and participation in TIF’s activities. 
B 
19 – 15 units 
Describes Thalassaemia Associations which have a patient voice, some national 
presence with educational and advocacy activities and occasional communication and 
participation in TIF’s activities. These associations have a good potential to upgrade 
to category ‘A’ by undertaking more targeted actions. 
C 
14 – 10 units 
Describes Thalassaemia Associations which have some activities with rare 
participation in TIF’s activities, with weak to poor effectiveness. 
D 
≤ 9 units 
Describes Thalassaemia Associations which have serious weaknesses, engagement in 
educational and advocacy activities is poor and communication with TIF or 
participation in TIF activities is non-existent. 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
438 
Finally, as this chapter also features as a new addition of one of the key TIF publications – the Guidelines for the 
Management of Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia – where recommendations by medical experts are 
incorporated, below are briefly listed some important disease-specific areas of possible patient engagement at 
national level (Table 6). 
 
Table 6. Important areas for patient engagement at the national level 
Patients should be engaged in the: 
1. 
Design of national disease specific registries and/or patient health records; 
2. Design of education or informational material that is prepared by health professionals and is 
focused on patient care, new drugs, research etc; 
3. 
Planning of the transfusion services and the related whole chain of the transfusion process. TD 
patients spend considerable amount of their time throughout their lives in hospitals/ centres/ wards/ 
clincs for their one or two or more monthly transfusions. The timings of consultation and transfusion 
therapy are expected by patients to be less burdensome and more patient-friendly allowing the 
least interruption in their lives and profession; 
4. Context of research and clinical trials at all stages of the process – prior, during and post; 
5. Post authorisation process of drugs facilitating the collection of real patients’ data on the value, 
effectiveness and safety of a drug; 
6. Negotiations and discussions for pricing of and access to drugs and therapies; 
7. 
Plan of actions prepared by national competent authorities for addressing an epidemic or pandemic 
crisis (e.g. COVID-10 pandemic); 
8. Revisiting, revising or developing new recommendations and/or legislations that are related to their 
care and quality of lives; 
9. Identifying gaps and weaknesses in the care provided for their condition in their particular hospital/ 
ward/ clinic/ centre and in the solutions suggested/ proposed; 
10. Interactions concerning the designing of national studies on the cost effectiveness versus added 
value of a new drug/ therapy; 
11. Preparation of protocols and/or guidelines with the aim to integrate their views and experience and 
to bring forward in any equation the element of quality of life, which is often ‘forgotten’ or 
underestimated in importance by medical/ scientific specialists and competent health/ social 
authorities; 
12. Revisiting the process or development of new social care policies; 
13. National health committees for raising awareness on the disease and blood donation campaigns. 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
439 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Aymé, S., Kole, A. & Groft, S. (2008) 
Empowerment of patients: lessons from 
the rare diseases community. Lancet 
(London, England). [Online] 371 (9629), 
2048–2051. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60875-2. 
2. Bombard, Y., Baker, G.R., Orlando, E., 
Fancott, C., et al. (2018) Engaging patients 
to improve quality of care: a systematic 
review. 
Implementation 
science: 
IS. 
[Online] 13 (1), 98. Available from: 
doi:10.1186/s13012-018-0784-z. 
3. 
Chakradhar, S. (2015) Training on trials: 
patients taught the language of drug 
development. Nature Medicine. [Online] 
21 
(3), 
209–210. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1038/nm0315-209. 
4. De Santis, M., Hervas, C., Weinman, A., 
Bosi, 
G., 
et 
al. 
(2019) 
Patient 
empowerment of people living with rare 
diseases. Its contribution to sustainable 
and resilient healthcare systems. Annali 
dell’Istituto Superiore Di Sanita. [Online] 
55 
(3), 
283–291. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.4415/ANN_19_03_15. 
5. Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions 
(2019) Patient access to innovative 
medicines in Europe. A collaborative and 
value based approach. [Online]. p.44. 
Available 
from: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/
Deloitte/uk/Documents/life-sciences-
health-care/deloitte-uk-patient-access-
to-innovative-medicine-in-europe.pdf 
[Accessed: 15 February 2021]. 
6. EMA (2019) From laboratory to patient: 
The journey of a centrally authorised 
medicine. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documen
ts/other/laboratory-patient-journey-
centrally-authorised-medicine_en.pdf 
[Accessed: 15 February 2021]. 
7. 
EMA, Stakeholders & Communication 
Division (2014) Pilot phase to involve 
patients in benefit/risk discussions at 
CHMP meetings. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documen
ts/other/pilot-phase-involve-patients-
benefit/risk-discussions-chmp-
meetings_en.pdf [Accessed: 15 February 
2021]. 
8. Gabutti, V. & Piga, A. (1996) Results of 
long-term iron-chelating therapy. Acta 
Haematologica. [Online] 95 (1), 26–36. 
Available from: doi:10.1159/000203853. 
9. Geissler, J., Ryll, B., di Priolo, S.L. & 
Uhlenhopp, M. (2017) Improving Patient 
Involvement in Medicines Research and 
Development:: A Practical Roadmap. 
Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory 
Science. 
[Online] 
51 
(5), 
612–619. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1177/2168479017706405. 
10. Hertel, E., Cheadle, A., Matthys, J., 
Coleman, K., et al. (2019) Engaging 
patients in primary care design: An 
evaluation of a novel approach to 
codesigning care. Health Expectations: An 
International 
Journal 
of 
Public 
Participation in Health Care and Health 
Policy. [Online] 22 (4), 609–616. Available 
from: doi:10.1111/hex.12909. 
11. Iolascon, 
A., 
De 
Franceschi, 
L., 
Muckenthaler, M., Taher, A., et al. (2019) 
EHA 
Research 
Roadmap 
on 
Hemoglobinopathies and Thalassemia: An 
Update. HemaSphere. [Online] 3 (3), e208. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1097/HS9.0000000000000208. 
12. Lavallee, D.C., Chenok, K.E., Love, R.M., 
Petersen, C., et al. (2016) Incorporating 
Patient-Reported Outcomes Into Health 
Care To Engage Patients And Enhance 
Care. Health Affairs (Project Hope). 
[Online] 35 (4), 575–582. Available from: 
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1362. 
13. Levitan, B., Getz, K., Eisenstein, E.L., 
Goldberg, M., et al. (2018) Assessing the 
Financial Value of Patient Engagement: A 
Quantitative 
Approach 
from 
CTTI’s 
Patient Groups and Clinical Trials Project. 
Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory 
Science. 
[Online] 
52 
(2), 
220–229. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1177/2168479017716715. 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
440 
14. Náfrádi, L., Nakamoto, K. & Schulz, P.J. 
(2017) Is patient empowerment the key to 
promote adherence? A systematic review 
of the relationship between self-efficacy, 
health locus of control and medication 
adherence. PloS One. [Online] 12 (10), 
e0186458. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0186458. 
15. Parsons, S., Starling, B., Mullan-Jensen, 
C., Tham, S.-G., et al. (2016) What do 
pharmaceutical industry professionals in 
Europe believe about involving patients 
and 
the 
public 
in 
research 
and 
development of medicines? A qualitative 
interview study. BMJ open. [Online] 6 (1), 
e008928. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008928. 
16. Perfetto, E.M., Burke, L., Oehrlein, E.M. & 
Epstein, R.S. (2015) Patient-Focused Drug 
Development: A New Direction for 
Collaboration. Medical Care. [Online] 53 
(1), 
9–17. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000273. 
17. Single, A.N.V., Facey, K.M., Livingstone, 
H. & Silva, A.S. (2019) Stories of Patient 
Involvement Impact in Health Technology 
Assessments: 
A 
Discussion 
Paper. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Technology 
Assessment in Health Care. [Online] 35 (4), 
266–272. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1017/S0266462319000552. 
18. Tenti, E., Simonetti, G., Bochicchio, M.T. & 
Martinelli, G. (2018) Main changes in 
European Clinical Trials Regulation (No 
536/2014). Contemporary Clinical Trials 
Communications. [Online] 11, 99–101. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1016/j.conctc.2018.05.014. 
19. TNS Qual+ (2012) Patient Involvement - 
Aggregate 
Report. 
[Online]. 
p.124. 
Available 
from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/fi
les/systems_performance_assessment/d
ocs/eurobaro_patient_involvement_2012
_en.pdf [Accessed: 4 March 2021]. 
20. Truglio-Londrigan, 
M., 
Slyer, 
J.T., 
Singleton, J.K. & Worral, P. (2012) A 
qualitative systematic review of internal 
and 
external 
influences 
on 
shared 
decision-making 
in 
all 
health 
care 
settings. JBI library of systematic reviews. 
[Online] 10 (58), 4633–4646. Available 
from: doi:10.11124/jbisrir-2012-432. 
21. Vekeman, F., Sasane, M., Cheng, W.Y., 
Ramanakumar, 
A.V., 
et 
al. 
(2016) 
Adherence to iron chelation therapy and 
associated healthcare resource utilization 
and costs in Medicaid patients with sickle 
cell disease and thalassemia. Journal of 
Medical Economics. [Online] 19 (3), 292–
303. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.3111/13696998.2015.1117979. 
22. Zolnierek, K.B.H. & Dimatteo, M.R. (2009) 
Physician communication and patient 
adherence to treatment: a meta-analysis. 
Medical Care. [Online] 47 (8), 826–834. 
Available 
from: 
doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e31819a5acc.
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
441 
ANNEX I. TIF’S GRADING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSING THE 
ACTIVITIES OF TIF MEMBER ASSOCIATIONS 
Assessment of TIF Member Associations - Scoring 
No.  
Component* 
Indicator 
Score 
1. 
 
Association Leadership  
Patient  
4 
Parent 
3 
Other 
2 
Doctor 
1 
2.  
Communication frequency 
with TIF 
 
Regularly (at least monthly) 
3 
Irregularly 
2 
Rarely (less than 4 times a year)  
1 
Never  
0 
3. 
 
Participation in TIF 
educational activities (e.g. 
TIF e-Academy, webinars 
etc) 
Several (more than 4)  
3 
Few (2 – 3)  
2 
Only 1 
1 
No participation 
0 
4.  
Participation in TIF 
Conferences 
Several (more than 4)  
3 
Few (2 – 3)  
2 
Only 1 
1 
No participation 
0 
5.  
Celebration of 
International 
Thalassaemia Day – 8th of 
May 
Organise an activity every year 
3 
Occasionally organise activities  
2 
Rarely organise activities 
1 
No known activities organised 
0 
6.  
Organisation of 
educational events for 
their members  
Regularly  
3 
Occasionally  
2 
Rarely 
1 
No known events organised  
0 
7. 
 
Organisation of blood 
donation drives  
Regularly (main organizers to serve the patient community needs) 
3 
Occasionally (assist the organizing blood banks) 
2 
Rarely  
1 
Not part of the Associations’ scope of activities (other services are 
responsible)  
0 
8.  
Translation of TIF 
educational material   
Have translated at least 3  
3 
Have translated 2  
2 
Have translated 1 
1 
No known translations completed 
0 
9.  
Undertake advocacy 
activities (e.g. meetings 
with MoH etc) 
Regularly 
3 
Occasionally 
2 
Rarely  
1 
Not engaged in advocacy 
0 
 
*Based on the last 3 years  
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
442 
ANNEX II.  AN ASSESSMENT OF TIF MEMBER ASSOCIATIONS ACROSS THE WORLD 
BASED ON TIF’S GRADING SYSTEM 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
F 
Cyprus Thalassaemia Association 
Cyprus 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
28 
F 
Greek Thalassaemia Federation 
(EOTHA) 
Greece 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
28 
F 
Diwanyah Thalassaemia Association 
Iraq 
EMR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
28 
F 
(Atoder) Adana Thalassaemia & Sickle 
Cell Anemia 
Turkey 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
28 
F 
Bangladesh Thalassaemia Samity 
(Society) 
Bangladesh 
SEAR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
27 
F 
Thalassemics India 
India 
SEAR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
27 
F 
Yayasan Thalassaemia Indonesia 
Indonesia 
SEAR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
27 
F 
Federation Of Malaysian Thalassaemia 
Societies 
Malaysia 
WPR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
27 
F 
Emirates Thalassaemia Society 
United arab 
emirates 
EMR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
27 
G 
Greek Thalassaemia Association 
Greece 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
3 
26 
F 
Egyptian Thalassaemic Friends 
Association 
Egypt 
EMR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
26 
F 
Chronic Care Centre 
Lebanon 
EMR 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
26 
G 
Faith (Fight Against Thalassaemia) 
Pakistan 
EMR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
25 
F 
Associazione Ligure Thalassemici Onlus 
(Alt) 
Italy 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
3 
25 
F 
Maldivian Thalassaemia Society 
Maldives 
SEAR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
25 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
443 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
F 
Thalassemia Patients Friends Society 
(Tpfs Palestine) 
Palestine 
(occupied) 
EMR 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
25 
F 
Al-Madina Hereditary Blood Disorder 
Charity Society 
Saudi arabia 
EMR 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
25 
F 
The Society For Inherited & Severe 
Blood Disorders Trinidad And Tobago 
Limited 
Trinidad and 
tobago 
AMR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
25 
G 
Federation Des Associations De 
Malades Drepanocytaires Et 
Thalassemiques 
France 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
3 
24 
F 
Iranian Thalassaemia Society 
Iran (islamic 
republic of) 
EMR 
4 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
1 
3 
3 
24 
F 
United Onlus 
Italy 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
24 
F 
Nepal Thalassaemia Society 
Nepal 
SEAR 
3 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
3 
24 
G 
Association "El Amani" Des Anemies 
Hemolytiques Congenitales 
Algeria 
EMR 
3 
3 
2 
3 
3 
1 
3 
3 
2 
23 
F 
Children's Thalassaemia Foundation Ltd 
Hong kong 
sar 
WPR 
3 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
23 
F 
Thalassaemia And Sickle Cell Australia 
Australia 
WPR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
22 
F 
Savab Dunyasi Thalassaemia 
Association 
Azerbaijan 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
22 
F 
Thalassemia Foundation Of Canada 
Canada 
AMR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
22 
F 
Thalassemia Association In Niniva 
Iraq 
EMR 
3 
3 
1 
1 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
22 
F 
Jordanian Thalassemia & Hemophilia 
Society 
Jordan 
EMR 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
22 
F 
United Kingdom Thalassaemia Society 
(Ukts) 
United 
kingdom 
EUR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
22 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
444 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
F 
Cooley's Anemia Foundation 
United states 
of america 
AMR 
4 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
22 
G 
Thalassemia Society Of Mauritius 
Mauritius 
AFR 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
0 
3 
21 
G 
Oscar Nederland 
Netherlands 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
21 
F 
Talasemi Federasyonu (Thalassemia 
Federation Of Turkey) 
Turkey 
EUR 
4 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
2 
21 
G 
Foundation Against Thalassaemia 
(Regd.) 
India 
SEAR 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
20 
G 
Unlimited Health Humanitarian  
Organization 
Iraq 
EMR 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
0 
2 
20 
G 
Vietnamese Thalassaemia Association 
Viet na 
WPR 
1 
1 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
20 
F 
Lab One Foundation Of Thalassaemi 
Bangladesh 
SEAR 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
20 
G 
Bangladesh Thalassemia Foundation 
Bangladesh 
SEAR 
1 
3 
1 
1 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
19 
G 
National Thalassaemia Welfare Society 
(Regd) 
India 
SEAR 
1 
2 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
19 
G 
Thalassemians Welfare Organization 
Pakistan 
EMR 
4 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
0 
2 
19 
G 
Al Ahsa Association Charity For Genetic 
Diseases 
Saudi arabia 
EMR 
3 
2 
1 
3 
3 
3 
2 
0 
2 
19 
F 
Yemen Thalassaemia & Genetic Blood 
Disorders Society 
Yemen 
EMR 
3 
3 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
1 
19 
G 
Sickle Cell And Thalassaemia Ireland 
Ireland 
EUR 
3 
3 
1 
3 
2 
3 
0 
0 
3 
18 
G 
Pertubuhan Thalasaemia Pulau Pinang 
Malaysia 
WPR 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
3 
18 
G 
Zainabia Blood Bank & Thalassaemia 
Centre 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
2 
2 
3 
3 
2 
3 
0 
2 
18 
F 
Thalassaemia Society (Singapore) 
Singapore 
WPR 
4 
3 
1 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
1 
18 
G 
Seltene Anaemien Deutschland (Sam) 
Germany 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
1 
1 
0 
2 
1 
17 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
445 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
G 
Pakistan Thalassaemia Centre 
Pakistan 
EMR 
2 
3 
0 
2 
2 
3 
3 
0 
2 
17 
G 
Afzaal Memorial Thalassaemia 
Foundation (Amtf) 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
3 
2 
3 
3 
2 
3 
0 
2 
17 
G 
Associacao Portuguesa De Pais E 
Doentes Com Hemoglobinopatias 
Portugal 
EUR 
4 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
2 
17 
F 
Charity Foundation For Special Diseases 
Iran (islamic 
republic of) 
EMR 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
0 
3 
3 
17 
F 
Thalassaemia Federation Of Pakistan 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
17 
F 
Thalassaemia Society Of Pakistan 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
3 
17 
F 
Thalassaemia Foundation Of Thailand 
Thailand 
SEAR 
1 
1 
2 
3 
3 
3 
0 
2 
2 
17 
F 
Nebata (North Of England Bone Marrow 
& Thalassaemia Association) 
United 
kingdom 
EUR 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
0 
0 
1 
17 
G 
Thalassemia Patients Friends 
Association 
Egypt 
EMR 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2 
0 
0 
3 
16 
G 
Sickle Cell / Thalassaemia Association Of 
Nigeria 
Nigeria 
AFR 
2 
2 
1 
3 
2 
2 
2 
0 
2 
16 
G 
Kashif Iqbal Thalassaemia Care Centre 
(Trust) 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
0 
2 
16 
G 
The Swedish Blood Cancer Association 
Sweden 
EUR 
2 
3 
2 
3 
0 
2 
0 
1 
3 
16 
F 
Kurunegala Thalassaemia Association 
Sri lanka 
SEAR 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
3 
0 
3 
16 
G 
Thalassemia Foundation Of Ghana 
Ghana 
AFR 
3 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
2 
0 
2 
15 
G 
Thalassaemic Charitable Trust Pgimer-
Gmch, Chandigarh 
India 
SEAR 
2 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
3 
0 
2 
15 
G 
Mvr Welfare Foundation 
India 
SEAR 
1 
2 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
0 
1 
15 
G 
Durgapur Society For Prevention Of 
Thalassaemia And Aids 
India 
SEAR 
2 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
3 
0 
1 
15 
G 
Amina Bashir Memorial Trust 
Pakistan 
EMR 
3 
2 
0 
1 
3 
2 
3 
0 
2 
15 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
446 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
F 
Azerbaijan Thalassaemia Society Insan 
Azerbaijan 
EUR 
3 
3 
1 
2 
2 
0 
3 
0 
1 
15 
G 
Jamila Sultana Foundation 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
3 
0 
2 
14 
G 
Saudi Friends' Charity Of Thalassaemia 
& Sickle Cell Anemia Society 
Saudi arabia 
EMR 
1 
3 
0 
2 
3 
3 
0 
0 
2 
14 
G 
Taiwan Thalassaemia Association (Twta) 
Taiwan 
WPR 
3 
2 
0 
3 
2 
2 
0 
0 
2 
14 
G 
Jad-O-Jehad Foundation 
Pakistan 
EMR 
3 
2 
0 
1 
2 
2 
2 
0 
1 
13 
G 
Balikatang Thalassemia 
Philippines 
WPR 
1 
3 
1 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
2 
13 
F 
Moroccan Association Of Thalassaemia 
And Hemoglobin Diseases (Mathed) 
Morocco 
EMR 
1 
2 
2 
3 
2 
1 
0 
0 
2 
13 
G 
Association Francaise De Lutte Contre 
Les Thalassaemies (Aflt) 
France 
EUR 
3 
1 
0 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
2 
12 
F 
Thalassaemia Society Of New  South  
Wales 
Australia 
WPR 
4 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
0 
0 
1 
12 
G 
Thalassaemia Welfare Centre-
Bangladesh 
Bangladesh 
SEAR 
1 
2 
0 
1 
2 
1 
3 
0 
1 
11 
G 
Mercy Association For Thalassaemia 
Patients In Wasit 
Iraq 
EMR 
2 
1 
0 
2 
3 
1 
1 
0 
1 
11 
G 
Kuwait Thalassaemia Society 
Kuwait 
EMR 
1 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
G 
Association Marocaine De Thalassaemie 
Et Drepanocytose 
Morocco 
EMR 
2 
2 
0 
2 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
10 
G 
Asociacion De Talasemia Argentina 
Argentina 
AMR 
2 
3 
0 
0 
2 
1 
0 
0 
1 
9 
G 
Interessengemeinschaft 
Sichelzellkrankheit Und Thalassaemie 
E.V. (Ist E.V.) 
Germany 
EUR 
3 
2 
1 
2 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
9 
F 
Society For Health Education 
Maldives 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
3 
0 
1 
9 
G 
Albanian Association Of Thalassaemia 
And Haemoglobinopathies 
Albania 
EUR 
3 
1 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
8 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
447 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
G 
Federation Of Indian Thalassemics 
India 
SEAR 
1 
2 
1 
3 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
F 
Thalassaemics' Organization In Bulgaria 
Bulgaria 
EUR 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
8 
G 
Thalassaemie Verein Ulm E.V. 
Germany 
EUR 
3 
1 
0 
2 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
7 
G 
Association Belge De Thalassemie Asbl 
Belgium 
EUR 
3 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6 
G 
Thalassaemia Chinese Federation 
China 
WPR 
2 
0 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6 
G 
Blood Donors Association (Mauritius) 
Mauritius 
AFR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0 
5 
G 
Alheta (Asociacion Espanola De Lucha 
Contra Las Hemoglobinopatias Y 
Talasemias) 
Spain 
EUR 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
G 
Thalassemiac And Leukemic Patients 
Turkey 
EUR 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
F 
Fondazione Italiana "L. Giambrone" Per 
La Guarigione Dalla Thalassemia 
Italy 
EUR 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
F 
Asociatia Persoanelor Cu Talasemie 
Majora 
Romania 
EUR 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
G 
Thalassaemia Foundation Of Argentina 
- Fundatal 
Argentina 
AMR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
South East Asia Institute For 
Thalassaemia India 
India 
SEAR 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
Thalassaemia Awareness Maltese 
Association (Tama) 
Malta 
EUR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
Pakistan Thalassaemia Welfare Society 
(Regd) 
Pakistan 
EMR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
Mindanao Thalassemia Foundation Inc 
Philippines 
WPR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
South African Thalassaemia Association 
South africa 
AFR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
Tadad - Thalassemi Dayanisma Dernegi 
Turkey 
EUR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
F 
Albanian Thalassaemics Association 
(Ata) 
Albania 
EUR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
448 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
F 
Bulgarian Anti-Thalassaemic 
Organisation (Bata) - Sofia 
Bulgaria 
EUR 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
G 
Social And Health Organization For 
Afghanistan(SOA) 
Afghanistan 
EMR 
 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Cambodian Thalassaemia Association 
Cambodia 
WPR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Mumbai Thalassaemic Society 
India 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Nivethan Trust 
India 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Parents' Association Thalassaemic Unit 
Trust (Mumbai) 
India 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Research Society Of Bjw Hospital For 
Children 
India 
SEAR 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Thalassemia Society (Karnataka) 
India 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
The Thalassaemia Society Of India 
India 
SEAR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Esfahan Thalassaemia Society 
Iran (islamic 
republic of) 
EMR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
The Galilee Foundation Of Thalassaemia 
& Sickle Cell Anemia 
Israel 
EUR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Johor Thalassaemia Society 
Malaysia 
WPR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Thalassaemia Association Of Malaysia 
Malaysia 
WPR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
F 
Palestine Avenir Foundation 
Palestine 
(occupied) 
EMR 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
G 
Indian Association Of Blood Cancer & 
Allied Diseases 
India 
SEAR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
G 
Malabar T.H.A.S. Society (Kerala) 
India 
SEAR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
G 
Thalassemia And Sickle Cell Society 
India 
SEAR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
G 
Etudier, Combattre Les Maladies De 
L'hemoglobine 
Luxembourg 
EUR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
449 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
G 
Abbotonians Medical Association 
Pakistan 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
G 
The Sudanese Patients And Parents 
Society For Sickle Cell 
Sudan 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Bahrain National Hereditary Anaemia 
Society 
Bahrain 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Israeli Association Of Thalassaemia & 
Sickle Cell Anemia 
Israel 
EUR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Associazione Veneta Per La Lotta Alla 
Talassemia (Avlt) 
Italy 
EUR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Thalassaemia Patients And Hereditary 
Blood Diseases 
Syrian arab 
republic 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Alphatt Tunisie 
Tunisia 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
F 
Akdeniz Talasemi Dernegi 
Turkey 
EUR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
G 
Guangdong Thalassaemia Association 
China 
WPR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Guangxi Thalassaemia Federation 
China 
WPR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Iraqi Thalassaemia Association 
Iraq 
EMR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Rifah Welfare Foundation 
Pakistan 
EMR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Thalassaemia Patients & Parents 
Society Of Pakistan 
Pakistan 
EMR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Uae Genetic Diseases Association 
United arab 
emirates 
EMR 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
Oscar Sandwell 
United 
kingdom 
EUR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
G 
The Vancouver Thalassaemia Society Of 
B.C. 
Canada 
AMR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G 
Syllogos Pashonton Apo Mesogeiaki 
Anaimia Nomou Korinthias 
Greece 
EUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE VALUE OF PATIENTS’ ENGAGEMENT 
450 
 
TIF Member Association 
Country 
Region 
Association 
Leadership 
Communication 
frequency with TIF 
Participation in TIF 
ed. Events 
Participation in TIF 
Conf. 
ITD - 8th May 
activities 
Organise ed. Events 
Organise blood 
drives 
Translation of  
TIF ed. Material 
Advocacy Activities 
Grading of 
activities 
G 
Associazione Lotta Alla Talassemia Di 
Ferrara 
Italy 
EUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G 
Associazione Thalassemici Di Torino 
Onlus 
Italy 
EUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
451 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
452 
14. UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE  
AUTHORS: Angastiniotis M. & Eleftheriou A. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Understanding the unmet needs of patients across the world, is translated as understanding and recognizing 
the rights to standards of services which are not reached or satisfied, so that basic human and patients’ rights 
are violated. To understand the unmet needs of patients with haemoglobin disorders and more particularly, 
those with Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (TDT), one must first recognize those needs, which if 
addressed appropriately, will contribute to patient survival, growth, and control of complications; thus 
facilitating integration into society and promoting a near normal and productive life. This is the ultimate goal 
that each government, and national competent authority should be aiming to achieve for the patients under 
their care; this is after all also what the UN Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDG) 2030 aim to achieve. To 
recognize these needs however, it is necessary to know the standards of care that must be met in order to 
achieve the best possible outcomes. For complex, multi-organ disorders these standards affect many levels of 
care and begin at the organizational level and include not only the health and social care services, but also the 
community at large as well as the individual patient and his/her family. 
The methods and services for addressing both TDT and Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia (NTDT) 
effectively have been identified over many years through clinical and other research; they have been adopted 
and applied, albeit mainly in a few high prevalence countries and initially those of the Mediterranean basin. 
These countries with the support of the World Health Organisation (WHO) have demonstrated successful 
results of their control programmes, both in the area of prevention (since the 1980s) [1] and of clinical 
management (since the 1990s) [2,3], thus constituting examples for all who aim to achieve successful 
outcomes. 
 
 
 
A few high prevalence countries recognized early on the huge medical, public health, social and economic 
repercussions that these disorders would entail if left unaddressed or sub-optimally managed. Suboptimal care 
would contribute to an increased national health burden and acceptance of premature death as an inevitable 
consequence. This realization was the true driving force for the governments of the Mediterranean countries, 
to move fast in the search for solutions. Moreover, the high disease prevalence in these countries brought with 
it increased needs in blood, medications and other clinical and social challenges which, in the absence of any 
effective policies to address their control, they inevitably expected to continue to increase in numbers and 
multiply in unmet needs. Hence, the assimilation of the political commitments to address their effective 
prevention and management was considered a one-way solution. 
✓ Increased survival rate with an increasingly ageing patient population, 
✓ Reduction of annual affected births, 
✓ Reduction of morbidity and mortality rates, and 
✓ Improved social integration. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
453 
The success of the programmes, initiated in the 1970s in the Mediterranean countries, was thus a consequence 
of: 
1. 
The early recognition of needs, that led to political commitment – a necessary element to effectively 
address the control of these disorders and,  
2. The development and implementation of nationally coordinated, supported and fully funded disease-
specific control programmes for prevention and management. 
 
What were the prerequisites for the establishment of disease-specific programmes and what components 
did they include? 
The existence of: 
1. 
A healthcare system that provided universal coverage, without leaving out-of-pocket expenses for the 
patients or families, bearing in mind the chronicity and the multiple elements involved in monitoring 
and treatment of this disorder, 
2. Strong public health and paediatric / haematology clinical infrastructures, 
3. 
Quality, centrally coordinated transfusion services (including haemovigilance systems), 
4. Epidemiological information based on surveys and Disease-specific patient registries, 
5. Ongoing continual analysis of patient outcomes and results for tailoring policies, programmes 
(surveillance programmes) and actions, and  
6. National guidelines, based on international consensus and evidence-based recommendations, and 
their nationwide adoption and implementation. 
 
Important prerequisites for effective clinical management are outlined below. More extended and 
comprehensive information is provided in TIF’s Guidelines for the Clinical Management of Transfusion 
Dependent and Non-Transfusion Dependent Thalassaemia. (For more information, see the relevant Chapters 
on Blood Transfusion, Management of Iron Overload and Multidisciplinary Care in this Global Review/Report). 
 
Table 1. Prerequisites for effective clinical management 
1. 
Dedicated areas/clinics within paediatric/haematology departments of hospitals or independent 
day care units attached to hospitals 
2. Blood transfusion services, with special attention to: 
• 
Adequacy – To maintain an acceptable level of haemoglobin to suppress endogenous 
erythropoiesis and address the severe anaemia. 
• 
Safety – To avoid transmission of blood-borne infections, as well as alloimmunisation and 
other transfusion-related adverse/unwanted events/reactions. 
• 
Special processing– To ensure RBC concentration and RBC viability, as well as adequate 
leukodepletion to prevent or minimize related adverse effects. 
• 
Appropriate storage – To safeguard the functional properties of RBCs and their appropriate 
and safe distribution, maintaining the cold chain and preventing contamination. 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
454 
3. 
Iron Chelation of patients: 
• 
Availability of all three (3) authorized and approved iron chelating agents.  
• 
Support for patient adherence. 
• 
Medical expertise in managing iron overload and tailoring treatment to address individual 
patient needs. 
4.  Well standardized iron load monitoring to keep iron levels within acceptable limits (the goal of iron 
chelation therapy), as described in consensus guidelines (such as TIF’s Guidelines):  
For example: 
• 
Serum Ferritin levels measured regularly every 3 months or more frequently  
• 
MRI measurements of iron in heart and liver at least annually in all patients   
(frequency is based on individual needs) 
5. Multidisciplinary Care (MDC) is an essential component of the medical care given that: 
• 
The various specialties see patients proactively for early detection of organ involvement and 
are well coordinated with the paediatric/haematology team responsible for patient care. 
• 
A single clinical record is maintained (patient healthcare record) and shared with all 
medical/health specialists involved in the care of the patient. 
• 
Mutually agreed treatment decisions are taken as a result of meetings and regular interactions 
between the paediatric/haematology team and other medical specialists following the 
patient. 
6. Existence of Reference Centres that: 
• 
Have the ability to provide expert diagnosis and patient management, resulting in optimal 
care according to international guidelines. 
• 
Are able to support patients that undergo routine treatment in smaller peripheral centres 
(even with less expertise) with official networking and data sharing facilities. 
• 
Have an appropriate governance and organizational structure with clear cut professional roles. 
• 
Have well designed spaces for patient treatment (e.g. privacy) and medical consultations. 
• 
Maintain a patient registry. 
• 
Are involved in teaching and research. 
 
Today, all the above elements are included in the recommendations of international guidelines, which if and 
when adopted, can contribute significantly to the planning of appropriate services by national competent 
authorities and the provision of quality care by treating physicians. 
Multidisciplinary Care (MDC) is given a special reference in this section because it constitutes an important need 
that has not been fully appreciated by service providers across the world to-date. 
The multi-organ involvement seen in thalassaemia is significant and increases with age across countries even 
in well treated patients [1, 2]. It is thus expected that the treating physicians (i.e., a haematologist, or an 
experienced paediatrician or internist) will supervise the provision of care services and make every effort to 
coordinate with other medical specialists and healthcare professionals including at least the following: 
• 
SPECIALISED NURSES. The important and wide-ranging responsibilities and competences of 
haemoglobinopathy nurses include the supervision of blood transfusions, practical aspects of iron 
chelation therapy, patient support and communication, provision of information, encouragement of 
self-management, and symptom control amongst others [3, 4]. To develop the kind of expertise 
required there is need for continuity of care and not the frequent rotation of staff that is often 
witnessed in hospital services. The specialist nurse is generally the closest contact to the patient in the 
clinic and often acts as liaison between the patient and the medical team. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
455 
• 
CARDIOLOGIST. In view of the importance of cardiac monitoring and timely management of heart 
complications, the cardiologist forms a central figure in the team. Heart complications are closely 
related to anaemia, iron overload, iron chelation, endocrinopathies, nutritional factors, and other 
issues in this multi-organ condition. It is therefore important that cardiologists proactively monitor and 
understand the broader issues of concern, and be able to discuss their findings, not only with 
colleagues on the same team but also with patients, so that treatment decisions or modifications can 
be taken in agreement. Cardiologists with special interest in thalassaemia should therefore be 
identified and invited to supervise monitoring and treatment of patients in close collaboration with the 
team [5, 6]. 
• 
HEPATOLOGIST. In both TDT and NTDT there is increasing development of liver complications, which 
are responsible for an increasing proportion of morbidity and mortality. These are due to iron toxicity 
to the liver, often with a contribution from viral infections. Management of liver disease is also 
complicated by the presence of iron overload, with or without the contribution of chronic viral hepatitis 
[7,8]. Matters such as the role of intensifying iron chelation, the use of anti-viral agents, and preventing 
the progression of liver disease to cirrhosis and carcinoma make it imperative that the 
paediatric/haematology team works for example in close collaboration with the hepatologist. 
• 
ENDOCRINOLOGIST. Endocrine complications are almost universally seen in thalassaemia patients. 
They affect the patients’ quality of life as well as having serious consequences to vital organs [9]. It is 
therefore important, from an early age, that all transfusion-dependent patients be assessed by an 
endocrinologist who is able to supervise all treatment that may be necessary. The importance of the 
endocrinologist in the multidisciplinary team is wide-reaching, as illustrated by the psychological 
impact of endocrine disorders (including delayed puberty) and the need for frequent liaison with the 
team. 
• 
DIABETES SPECIALIST. The prevalence of diabetes is high in thalassaemia and rising as patients grow 
older; in some cases, reaching rates as high as 20%. A joint diabetes/thalassaemia clinic on a regular 
basis may be recommended as part of the multidisciplinary care [10]. 
• 
PSYCHOLOGIST. Patients who live with a lifelong disorder since infancy, that requires constant 
monitoring and care, are subject to many challenges and stress, along with their families [11]. The need 
for the involvement of a psychologist thus on the team should not require further emphasis, the role 
of whom is extended to support and advise the care team, including the patients’ families.  
• 
SOCIAL WORKER. The role of a social worker frequently overlaps with that of a psychologist. There 
are however specific problems that arise in the family, particularly of financial and social nature, which 
fall clearly in the realm of the social worker. This is of course dependent on the role of the social and 
welfare system in each country and.  it is the role of the care team to decide whether there is a need 
for input from social workers or not on the circumstances of each case. 
• 
OBSTETRICIAN. In cases of pregnancy, obstetric specialists should be involved and collaborate closely 
with the thalassaemia treating team from the stage of pre-pregnancy counselling right through to 
labour and post-partum management [12, 13]. 
 
Regrettably, published information (which is quite confined and largely sporadic) and data accumulated 
by the Thalassaemia International Federation (TIF) throughout its three decades of work (by means of field 
visits, reports and interactions with stakeholders at the local level), have shown that the needs of the 
greatest majority of the patients who live in the developing economies are not addressed effectively. In 
fact, even basic services that are the cornerstones to the survival and management of these patients are 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
456 
in many instances inadequately addressed. Other needs, including support for adherence to prescribed 
treatment that is lifelong, taken on a daily basis, cumbersome and often painful, are generally not 
appropriately appreciated or prioritized. This holds true also for the necessary support required by patients 
and families in their transition from paediatric to adult care. Moreover, elements such as MDC and 
Reference Centres (as described briefly above) are grossly neglected; only a very small percentage of 
patients globally benefit from such essential components of care and these live mainly in 5 – 6 countries 
that have a high disease prevalence in their indigenous or immigrant population and usually very 
developed economies. 
 
The global inequalities in thalassaemia care, reflect mainly the economic and social inequalities that 
characterize today’s world. An improvement certainly can be achieved by reaching out to policymakers and 
those responsible for allocating resources to particular services. It is necessary for policies and action plans to 
improve access to quality care in these complex disorders. Promoting universal health coverage and 
recognizing that access is a multidimensional concept which includes availability, and affordability. [Cu A, 
Meister S, Lefebvre B, Ridde V. Assessing healthcare access using the Levesque's conceptual framework- a 
scoping review. Int J Equity Health. 2021 May 7;20(1):116. doi: 10.1186/s12939-021-01416-3. PMID: 33962627]. 
A recent study in Greece investigated barriers that patients with beta-thalassaemia face in accessing the care 
they include socioeconomic influences. Even though thalassaemia patients faced no barriers in accessing the 
transfusion centre or the hospital, all medications for an associated condition have to be prescribed by a 
specialist outside the transfusion unit and this results in additional expense incurred by the patient; they also 
face challenges in accessing laboratory test services, and blood shortages, which is a serious challenge affecting 
blood transfusions in Greece. These conclusions from a survey among the patient population indicate that even 
high-income countries, with a tradition in managing thalassaemia, face perceived access issues [Souliotis K; 
Golna C; Nikolaidi S; Vatheia G; Hasurdjiev S. Access to health care for patients with thalassaemia in Greece: a 
cross-sectional study. East Mediterr Health J. 2020;26(12):1482–1492. https://doi.org/10.26719/emhj.20.118] 
Chronic disorders, especially if rare in a particular population, are often invisible to national health authorities, 
and even more so when resources are limited. These issues are not easily addressed. Services for haemoglobin 
disorders often have to compete with other chronic conditions, and so lobbying and advocacy are required to 
gain the resources needed to upgrade existing or even create new services. Such advocacy cannot be the 
responsibility of the treating expert alone.  Empowered national thalassaemia associations have historically 
succeeded in promoting policies and gaining the attention of health authorities, and in fact TIF was created 
based on this experience. 
However, in order to become equal and productive partners at the decision-making table, support groups must 
be armed with epidemiological data and provide meaningful and evidence-based policy suggestions that will 
ultimately lead to the considerable reduction of the burden of disease to both patients and families as well as 
the wider national public health environment. Indeed, for most countries as this global review/report is 
revealing, a major unmet need is the existence of updated, nationwide data, patients’ registries and electronic 
health records from which accurate and reliable information can be derived and appropriately analysed. 
Morbidity and mortality data must be presented so that health planners know where there are gaps in the 
services that are provided, which incur additional expenses caused by preventable complications and contribute 
to the premature death of patients instead of enabling longevity and survival with adequate social integration 
of patients and their families.  
An awareness and understanding of the social determinants, the social and economic environment and factors 
which impact daily living; such influences may influence significantly patient outcomes and may be forgotten. 
Malnutrition in thalassaemia patients has been described in various environments but may be expected to more 
obvious in low-income settings. In a study from India 48.2% of patients (mean age 8.0±2.3) were malnourished 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
457 
[ Biswas B, Naskar NN, Basu K, Dasgupta A, Basu R, Paul B. Malnutrition, Its Attributes, and Impact on Quality 
of Life: An Epidemiological Study among β-Thalassemia Major Children. Korean J Fam Med. 2021 Jan;42(1):66-
72. doi: 10.4082/kjfm.19.0066. 31955549]. The family environment is of primary importance and often ignored 
in service provision. Yet family members may be seriously affected both in physical and psychological health [ 
Angane AY, Kadam KS, Ghorpade GS, Unnithan VB. Who will guard the guardians? Cross-sectional study on 
prevalence of psychiatric morbidity, quality of life, and coping skills in caregivers of children with thalassemia 
major. J Postgrad Med. 2022 Apr-Jun;68(2):72-77. doi: 10.4103/jpgm.JPGM_1128_20. PMID: 34708694] 
One factor that must be recognized where rare diseases are concerned is the lack of physician experience 
outside academic and reference centres. In a study conducted in the USA comparing knowledge and clinical 
practices of physicians treating thalassaemia in centres of excellence and secondary centres, the findings 
suggest practice gaps and barriers to optimal care in the transition from paediatric to adult care, the ongoing 
management of adult patients, knowledge of the disease state, and familiarity with emerging treatments with 
the potential to improve clinical outcomes. The conclusion is that the level of participation in CME activities 
needs to be improved for all healthcare professionals involved in the care of patients with beta thalassemia 
[Stacy S, Sheth S, Coleman B, Cerenzia W. An assessment of the continuing medical education needs of US 
physicians in the management of patients with beta thalassemia. Ann Hematol. 2021 Jan;100(1):27-35. doi: 
10.1007/s00277-020-04246-5.  PMID: 32870368] 
 
METHODOLOGY USED BY TIF FOR SCORING THE 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THALASSAEMIA-RELATED SERVICES 
ACROSS ITS MEMBER COUNTRIES 
 
TIF has made an effort to score the ‘anticipated’ performance of each member country (through its National 
Thalassaemia Associations), based on the services the country provides to its patients. In this context, six (6) 
essential components (1 – 6) of clinical management and two other relevant elements (A+B) were considered 
together referred to as from now ‘Service’ (Table 1), the existence or availability of which supports and 
contributes significantly to the extent the care provided to the patients meets their needs as described above. 
These are as follows: 
Table 2. Service components (1-6) and elements (A & B) 
1. 
Blood transfusion services 
2. Iron monitoring tools and services 
3. 
Iron chelation therapy 
4. MDC services 
5. Reference/Expert Centres  
6. National Guidelines for the Prevention and Management of Thalassaemia 
A. Healthcare professionals’ expertise  
B. National Thalassaemia Patients/Parents Associations/support groups 
 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
458 
Information regarding the above was extracted and used (mainly after the year 2010) from: 
i. 
Published information (mainly PubMed) 
ii. 
Reported information to TIF  
iii. 
Patients’ responses to TIF’s specifically structured surveys 
It was not possible to assess the quality standard of the service in the absence of any relevant well documented 
data or information. The only indication that TIF felt safe to associate with quality were the survival rates and/or 
age distribution of patients and/or morbidity rates, where reliable such data existed. 
The following symbols (see Table 3 below) were used in assessing and scoring the services (as described in Table 
2) 
 
Table 3. Definition of scoring symbols 
✓ denotes recognition that the service was applied (i) nationwide (covering >70% of the population), 
and (ii) as a governmental disease programme or policy, and as such only published information was 
taken into consideration for this symbol. 
• 
describes the identified service (according to the methodology described earlier) as being provided 
partially (covering only a proportion of the population) e.g., hospital/clinic/centre based, city/region 
based but NOT nationwide, as a governmental disease programme or policy (based on absence of 
published information and/or TIF’s collected information) 
 
describes the absence or very confined existence of the service (based on absence of published 
information and/or TIF’s database) 
 
Each country’s scoring was a combination of the three symbols as shown below (Table 4): 
 
Table 4. TIF’s scoring and grading system 
Scoring 
Category / Grade 
8 √ 
A 
7 √ + 1  
6 √ + 2  
5 √ + 2  
4 √ + 4  
3 √ + 5  
B 
2 √ + 6  
1 √ + 7  
0 √ + 6 - 8  
C 
0 √ + 4 - 6  
D 
0 √ + 2 - 4  
E 
0 √ + 0 - 2  
F 
 
Some explanatory notes for the scoring and grading used: 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
459 
One symbol (from these described in Table 2) had to be assigned (as per the assessment process) to each of the 
8 services (1-6 and A+B) described above in Table 1. 
The numbers before the symbol indicate the number of services that are given the particular symbol. 
 
Grading between A – F of countries was thus related to the numbers of symbols a country scored/received. The 
bigger the number of the ‘favorable’ symbols i.e. √ and • the better the grade a country received. 
Table 5 below describes how the grading of each country was reached. In addition, and to help us understand 
perhaps better the different approaches of the countries in addressing thalassaemia needs, other useful 
information was included e.g. the country’s Income Group (World Bank 2020), Human Development Index 
(HDI), level of effectiveness of its Thalassaemia Prevention Programme (see Chapter on Prevention), the 
country’s GDP Health Expenditure (% of GDP), any reported / estimated national β-thalassaemia prevalence 
data (based on TIF’s reports/calculations and/or published data), anticipated/expected β-thalassaemia births/ 
year (based on TIF’s calculations and/or published data), infant mortality rate and under-5 years of age mortality 
rates (as published). Further to these, and with the view of supporting our scoring and grading, survival rates 
and age distribution information amongst patients with thalassasemia, were marked as ‘existing’ according to 
the same scoring symbols (i.e.  √ for nationwide published data; • for partially available data, either published 
or available from reliable sources; x for no available data). 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
460 
World 
Bank 
UNDP 
TIF 
Country Information 
Thalassaemia Services 
Thal- related 
Indicators 
World Bank Development 
Indicators 
Country 
Income Group 
HDI 
Prevention 
Thalassaemia  
Services
GDP Health 
Expenditure 
(% of GDP) 
Reported / 
Estimated 
National β-
thalassaemia 
Expected β-
thalassaemia 
births/ year 
Transfusion 
Iron Load 
Monitoring 
Iron Chelation 
provided 
MDC 
Ref. Centre(s) 
HCP Expertise 
National 
Guidelines 
National 
Thalassaemia 
A
i ti
Survival Rate 
Age Distribution 
Infant Mortality 
rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Under 5 
mortality rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Albania 
Upper 
Middle 
Very 
High 
D 
C 
5.26 
356 
0.625/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
9 
9.7 
Greece 
High 
Very 
High 
A 
A 
7.72 
3,241 
1.64/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
3 
3.8 
Italy 
High 
Very 
High 
A 
A 
8.67 
7,044 
0.46/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
3 
3.1 
Iran 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
A 
B 
8.66 
20,777 
0.43/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
12 
13.9 
Cyprus 
High 
Very 
High 
A 
A 
6.77 
659 
5.55/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
2 
2.3 
Palestine 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium/ 
Low 
A 
C 
x 
689 
0.4/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
x 
 
l 
17 
19.4 
Singapore 
High 
Very 
High 
A 
A 
4.46 
258 
0.2/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
x 
√ 
2 
2.5 
Oman 
High 
Very 
High 
B 
C 
4.13 
591 
1.06/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
√ 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
 
10 
11.4 
Azerbaijan 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
C 
3.51 
3,300 
0.344/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
x 
 
l 
18 
20.4 
UK 
High 
Very 
High 
B 
A 
7.72 
1,564 
0.042/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
4 
4.3 
Lebanon 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
A 
8.35 
375 
0.132/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
x 
√ 
6 
7.2 
Turkey 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
B 
4.12 
5,500 
0.121/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
√ 
9 
10.0 
Jordan 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
B 
7.79 
1,300 
0.306/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
x 
 
 
13 
15.6 
Maldives 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
B 
9.41 
670 
8.97/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
7 
7.6 
France 
High 
Very 
High 
B 
A 
11.26 
666 
0.0016/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
4 
4.5 
UAE 
High 
Very 
High 
B 
A 
4.23 
2,000 
0.23/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
x 
√ 
6 
7.5 
Sri Lanka 
Lower 
Middle 
High 
B 
B 
3.76 
4,000 
0.18/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
x 
x 
 
l 
6 
7.1 
Thailand 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
B 
3.79 
98,460 
3.7/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
8 
9.0 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
461 
World 
Bank 
UNDP 
TIF 
Country Information 
Thalassaemia Services 
Thal- related 
Indicators 
World Bank Development 
Indicators 
Country 
Income Group 
HDI 
Prevention 
Thalassaemia  
Services
GDP Health 
Expenditure 
(% of GDP) 
Reported / 
Estimated 
National β-
thalassaemia 
Expected β-
thalassaemia 
births/ year 
Transfusion 
Iron Load 
Monitoring 
Iron Chelation 
provided 
MDC 
Ref. Centre(s) 
HCP Expertise 
National 
Guidelines 
National 
Thalassaemia 
A
i ti
Survival Rate 
Age Distribution 
Infant Mortality 
rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Under 5 
mortality rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Kuwait 
High 
Very 
High 
B 
C 
5.00 
400 
0.132/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
√ 
x 
x 
x 
 
l 
7 
7.9 
Mauritius 
High 
High 
D 
D 
5.83 
200 
0.37/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
14 
16 
Malaysia 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
B 
C 
3.76 
7,984 
0.58/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
√ 
 
l 
 
 
 
l 
√ 
7 
8.6 
Qatar 
High 
Very 
High 
C 
C 
2.49 
163 
0.225/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
6 
6.5 
Vietnam 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
C 
E 
5.92 
20,000 
0.35/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
x 
16 
19.9 
KSA 
High 
Very 
High 
C 
C 
6.36 
8,919 
0.17/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
x 
√ 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
6 
6.6 
Iraq 
Upper 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
C 
C 
4.11 
17,000 
0.576/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
x 
x 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
22 
25.9 
India 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
C 
3.54 
150,000 
0.58/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
x 
x 
28 
34.3 
Pakistan 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
C 
C 
3.20 
50,000 
1.0/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
x 
x 
56 
67.2 
Tunisia 
Lower 
Middle 
High 
C 
C 
7.29 
742 
0.122/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
√ 
x 
x 
x 
x 
15 
16.9 
Bulgaria 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
D 
C 
7.35 
270 
0.156/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
6 
6.7 
Egypt 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
C 
4.95 
9,258 
0.7/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
17 
20.3 
Belgium 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
C 
10.32 
62 
0.002/ 
1000 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
3 
3.4 
Trinidad 
&Tobago 
High 
High 
D 
C 
6.93 
100 
0.3/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
√ 
x 
 
l 
16 
17.5 
Bangladesh 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
E 
2.34 
30.000 -
50,000 
2.1/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
26 
30.8 
Germany 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
C 
11.43 
5 - 600 
0.0017/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
3 
3.8 
Indonesia 
Upper 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
C 
2.87 
10,555 
2.13/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
x 
l 
20 
23.9 
Algeria 
Lower 
Middle 
High 
D 
D 
6.22 
3,000 
0.1/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
20 
23.3 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
462 
World 
Bank 
UNDP 
TIF 
Country Information 
Thalassaemia Services 
Thal- related 
Indicators 
World Bank Development 
Indicators 
Country 
Income Group 
HDI 
Prevention 
Thalassaemia  
Services
GDP Health 
Expenditure 
(% of GDP) 
Reported / 
Estimated 
National β-
thalassaemia 
Expected β-
thalassaemia 
births/ year 
Transfusion 
Iron Load 
Monitoring 
Iron Chelation 
provided 
MDC 
Ref. Centre(s) 
HCP Expertise 
National 
Guidelines 
National 
Thalassaemia 
A
i ti
Survival Rate 
Age Distribution 
Infant Mortality 
rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Under 5 
mortality rate 
(per 1,000 live 
births) 
Sweden 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
D 
10.90 
140 
0.0026/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
x 
2 
2.6 
Canada 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
A 
10.79 
1,200 
0.006/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
4 
4.9 
USA 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
A 
16.89 
1,326 
0.004/ 
1000 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
 
l 
√ 
 
l 
 
l 
6 
6.5 
Myanmar 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
F 
4.79 
4,079 
0.66/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
36 
44.7 
Romania 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
D 
5.56 
200 - 300 
0.025/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
6 
7.0 
Yemen 
Low 
Medium/ 
Low 
D 
F 
4.88 
800 
0.484/ 
1000 
? 
? 
? 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
44 
58.4 
Cambodia 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
F 
6.03 
U/A 
0.34/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
23 
26.6 
Laos (Lao 
PDR) 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
F 
2.25 
275 
4/ 
1000 
? 
? 
? 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
36 
45.5 
Nepal 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium/ 
Low 
D 
D 
5.84 
600 
1.28/ 
1000 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
26 
30.8 
Austria 
High 
Very 
High 
D 
D 
10.33 
60 
0.0014/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
x 
x 
x 
x 
3 
3.5 
Afghanistan 
Low 
Medium/ 
Low 
D 
F 
9.40 
16,500 
0.361/ 
1000 
? 
? 
? 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
47 
60.3 
Morocco 
Lower 
Middle 
Medium / 
Low 
D 
C 
5.31 
500 
0.07/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
x 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
18 
21.4 
Brazil 
Upper 
Middle 
High 
D 
B 
9.51 
662 
0.042/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
x 
 
l 
12 
13.9 
Argentina 
Upper 
Middle 
Very 
High 
D 
C 
9.62 
U/A 
0.046/ 
1000 
 
l 
 
l 
 
l 
x 
 
l 
√ 
√ 
√ 
x 
 
l 
8 
9.3 
 
FOR STATISTICAL ANALYSIS SEE ANNEX 1 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
463 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Four (4) countries received grade A with regards to their effectiveness in both the prevention and management 
programmes; all four (4) are high income countries, with low infant and under-5 mortality rates and with 
nationwide survival and age distribution data reported in published literature. 
Five (5) countries had a combination of A and B grading between their prevention and clinical related services, 
two (2) of which are in Europe; both high income countries, and three (3) in the Eastern Mediterranean Region; 
two (2) upper-middle and one (1) high income country.  All five (5) countries have low infant and under-5 
mortality rates, and four (4) had nationwide survival and age distribution data reported in published literature. 
Five (5) countries scored BB on prevention and clinical related services; four (4) upper-middle and one (1) lower-
middle income countries, all with low infant and under-5 mortality rates. Two (2) did not have and three (3) had 
nationwide survival and age distribution data reported in published literature. 
One may safely assume that all the above countries are providing adequate to nearly optimal services for their 
patients, optimal in AA’s to near optimal in AB, and good potential to reach near optimal care for countries 
scoring BB. 
Scoring B of prevention programme with scoring C of clinical services describes the practices in four (4) 
countries in the extended European Region, two (2) in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, and one (1) in the 
West Pacific Region. These are countries which focused for some time now on addressing haemoglobin 
disorders in the context of both prevention and clinical management; and have the potential and interest to 
improve both their prevention programmes to reach nationwide coverage and the medical care services to 
reach better quality standards. More possibilities lie with the two (2) Eastern Mediterranean Region countries 
on account of their small population size, lower disease prevalence and better economic conditions. 
Five (5) countries have a scoring combination of C for prevention and C for clinical services all of which in the 
Eastern Mediterranean Region (1 located in North Africa). These are countries in which clinical services were 
given more focus than prevention policies. Some disease-specific prevention policies in these countries may 
exist but these are mainly associated with a region of the country or are related to hospital-based services 
(mainly screening) and absence of other essential components of effective prevention (including genetic 
counselling, obstetric and prenatal diagnosis services). At the same time, and although focus has been given on 
clinical services, there is to-date no published information to document the quality of services or the nationwide 
existence of adequate and appropriate blood transfusion, iron load monitoring, chelation and MDC services in 
these countries. 
Large populations and/or high disease prevalence and/or poor economies and/or political instability and/or 
simply low disease prevalence (and thus rarity of the disease), and/or other heath priorities have not allowed 
prioritization of these disorders on their national health agendas. 
Ten (10) countries scored a combination of D for prevention, suggesting severe absence or the presence of very 
confined policies for prevention, while their clinical services score C, suggesting that more focus was given by 
governments on the medical care of the patients. This is a very interesting group of countries that span across 
five different regions of the world (as defined by WHO): Two (2) in the American Region (south), four (4) in the 
European Region (three (3) in the EU and one (1) in the extended Europe region), two (2) in the South East Asia 
Region and two (2) in the Eastern Mediterranean Region. These are countries of different population sizes, 
disease prevalence, healthcare systems and economies. Two (2) of those in the EU are of low to medium disease 
prevalence, robust economies and healthcare infrastructures, while the third one and the one (1) in the 
extended European region are in the upper middle-income group of countries, with low to medium disease 
prevalence and weaker public health and medical/social care infrastructures. The two (2) Eastern Mediterranean 
countries belong to the lower middle-income group, have medium disease prevalence and weak public and 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
464 
medical/social care services. Of the two South East Asia countries, one (1) is in the upper middle and the other 
is in the lower middle-income groups. Both of these countries have large populations and medium to high 
disease prevalence. Public and medical/social services are weak and in transition to universal coverage. The two 
(2) countries of the American Region (located in the southern part of the region) belong to the high and upper 
middle-income groups respectively and have low to medium disease prevalence. 
Five (5) countries exhibit poor prevention and clinical care services scoring D+D on both components Amongst 
them two (2) are very high-income group countries and have robust medical and public health infrastructures 
(e.g. Sweden and Austria) and recent introduction through migration and/or rarity of the disease may “justify” 
the current grading. Of the remaining three (3) countries of this scoring group, one (1) is in the EU amongst high 
income group countries and two (2) are in the Eastern Mediterranean and Southeast Asia Regions respectively, 
both with lower middle-income status, medium disease prevalence and weak public and health/social 
infrastructures. 
Six (6) countries score D for prevention and E or F for clinical services, suggesting very poor and limited disease-
specific programmes of both prevention and management. High numbers of annual affected births and high 
rates of morbidity and early death of patients are thus anticipated in these countries. 
Weak economies and/or large populations, political instability, health and/or social and/or environmental 
priorities have not permitted national health authorities in these countries to focus on any level, and certainly 
not to prioritize haemoglobin disorders on their national health agendas. 
Three (3) countries stand out in Table 4 as a result of their contradicting profile with respect to the control of 
haemoglobin disorders. These countries score A with documented great focus on the medical care (and active 
research) of thalassaemia and its inclusion on their national health agendas, but their work on prevention is 
severely lagging behind and have been scored with a D (all three in the American Region). Two (2) of these are 
of very high HDI and have very robust medical, public health and research infrastructures, and hence have great 
potential for improving national prevention efforts. The third one is of high HDI (upper-middle income) but 
weaker healthcare infrastructures and economy, thus posing potential challenges in promoting effective 
disease specific prevention programmes. 
 
UNMET NEEDS: FOCUS ON α-THALASSAEMIA 
INTRODUCTION 
Similar to β-thalassaemias, α-thalassaemia syndromes are among the most common inherited blood disorders, 
significantly affecting patients' health and imposing a substantial burden on healthcare systems. However, α-
thalassaemia has historically received less attention compared to β-thalassaemias. This disparity can be 
attributed to several factors: the difficulty in identifying carriers and sometimes, individuals with clinically 
significant α-thalassaemia syndromes (such as HbH disease) using widely available and inexpensive laboratory 
tests, which has led to an underestimation of the condition's prevalence; the historical misconception that HbH 
disease is a benign condition; the relatively lower burden of HbH disease on public health resources compared 
to β-thalassaemias, as individuals with HbH disease are typically non-transfusion dependent, making it a lower 
public health priority; the universal intrauterine demise of the most severe form of the disease (α-thalassaemia 
major) before the availability of intrauterine transfusions; and the prevalence of HbH disease in regions where 
limited resources have historically been allocated to more pressing health challenges, such as communicable 
diseases. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
465 
Recognizing this gap, this section aims to specifically highlight the current unmet needs of individuals with α-
thalassaemia and provide a roadmap for future directions. 
 
UNDERSTANDING THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF Α-
THALASSAEMIA 
It is no surprise that the first step toward improving care for a condition with significant regional and global 
impact is understanding its epidemiology. A better understanding of the distribution of α-thalassaemia, both 
regionally and globally, enables more effective allocation of resources and the development of better-tailored 
public health policies. However, this task is particularly challenging due to the diversity of inherited genotypes 
(e.g., α+ deletions, α0 deletions, and non-deletional mutations) and their interactions which lead to varied 
clinical phenotypes. Additionally, the presence of other genetic disease modifiers common in endemic areas, 
such as β-thalassaemia, β-globin variants, and G6PD deficiency, further complicates the picture. The challenge 
is compounded by the fact that carriers of the most common form of α-thalassaemia (α+ thalassaemia) often 
exhibit a completely normal haematological profile. Therefore, well-designed epidemiological studies on a 
regional scale are essential to accurately identify the prevalence and specific genetic mutations in α-globin 
genes which will in turn help setting up designing appropriate diagnostic tools (e.g. genetic panels) and setting 
up screening programs. While efforts to address this issue have been made in certain countries, significant 
further work is needed in regions where resources remain limited. 
 
SCREENING PROGRAMS 
Once a better understanding of the prevalence and underlying genetic mutations is achieved, region-specific 
diagnostic procedures can be developed. The focus should be on identifying carriers of α0 deletions and non-
deletional forms of α-globin gene mutations, which can lead to clinically significant forms of α-thalassaemia, 
including HbH disease and α-thalassaemia major. Screening programs for α-thalassaemia include prenatal 
carrier screening and neonatal screening for individuals affected with HbH disease. Neonatal screening is 
particularly valuable because the electrophoretic detection of Hb Bart’s during the neonatal period allows for 
early and cost-effective diagnosis of affected individuals. 
Similar to β-thalassaemias, neonatal screening for α-thalassaemia is not widely implemented. Only certain 
countries or regions with high prevalence have established such programs (e.g. Thailand, Taiwan, Hong Kong, 
southern provinces of China, Cyprus, and certain states in the US or provinces in Canada, and others). Similarly, 
prenatal screening is employed only in regions where α-thalassaemia is known to be prevalent. This leaves 
thousands of at-risk couples undiagnosed in areas without established prenatal screening programs as carriers 
of α-thalassaemia are often misdiagnosed with other microcytic anaemias, such as iron deficiency anaemia, 
due to overlapping haematological features. 
 
UNDERSTANDING THE CLINICAL OUTCOMES OF HBH 
DISEASE AND Α-THALASSEMIA MAJOR 
Despite its prevalence and clinical significance, high-quality research on the clinical outcomes and factors 
influencing these outcomes in α-thalassaemia remains limited. Most studies are constrained by their 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
466 
retrospective or cross-sectional designs, a lack of true representation of older populations, and insufficient 
differentiation between the various forms of the disease (e.g., deletional vs. non-deletional mutations). A 
recent review of the literature highlighted significant variability in clinical phenotypes across different published 
reports, likely due to differences in study design, patient selection in various settings, and the underlying 
genotypes and other unaccounted factors in the cohorts examined. Currently, there is very limited data on 
thalassaemia-related complications in older age or the mortality rates of individuals with HbH disease. 
Furthermore, while the pathophysiology of deletional HbH disease is primarily driven by a uniform α-to-β 
globin chain imbalance, non-deletional mutations lead to variable pathophysiological effects that warrant 
special attention. Not all non-deletional forms of HbH disease follow similar clinical trajectories, and unlike β-
thalassaemias where clinical severity correlates with beta-globin output, non-deletional α-thalassaemias 
exhibit diverse disease mechanisms that are not solely predicated on globin imbalance. As a result, different 
forms of α-thalassaemia can lead to varied clinical presentations and complications, which remain 
understudied. 
To address these gaps, well-designed longitudinal studies focusing on specific forms of α-thalassaemia across 
all age groups are essential. Given the rarity and diversity of certain mutations, collaborative, multi-center 
studies are particularly needed. Within this process, understanding the clinical outcomes of deletional HbH 
disease, which affects millions of individuals primarily in Southeast Asia but also worldwide, should remain a 
priority. Critical questions remain unanswered, such as how deletional HbH disease impacts individuals as they 
grow older, and its effects on quality of life and potential avenues for health improvement. 
α-Thalassemia major was once considered universally fatal, leading to intrauterine demise of affected fetuses. 
However, with the availability of intrauterine transfusions and advancements in perinatal care, many affected 
patients can now survive into adulthood. This presents a significant challenge to healthcare systems in regions 
where α0 thalassemia deletions are most prevalent. Despite these advancements, the long-term outcomes of 
these patients, particularly into adulthood, and the burden on public health systems remain poorly understood. 
Given the rarity of the condition, it deserves specialized attention to address these gaps in knowledge and care. 
 
IMPROVING THE OUTCOME OF PATIENTS WITH α-
THALASSAEMIAS 
Identifying the specific needs of patients is fundamental to providing appropriate care and improving outcomes 
and quality of life. Given the limited research on the clinical outcomes of HbH disease, it is unsurprising that the 
management of individuals with HbH disease has remained stagnant and largely extrapolated from practices 
for β-thalassaemia. This approach overlooks the distinct features of the two conditions, often resulting in 
suboptimal care. Currently, therapeutic options for HbH disease are limited to transfusions (either on-demand 
or as part of a regular transfusion program) and splenectomy, with no approved disease-modifying therapies 
available for this population. Moreover, the optimal approach to these treatments remains unclear and is 
largely based on practices for β-thalassaemia. Concerted efforts are needed to specifically study different 
treatment approaches for various forms of α-thalassaemia. Critical question such as the long-term effects of 
splenectomy, specific transfusion initiation targets, tailored approaches to iron chelation, and surveillance 
guidelines for disease-specific or treatment-related complications in patients with α-thalassaemia remain 
largely unanswered. 
Recently, newer disease-modifying treatments with various mechanisms of action have emerged, offering 
potential promise for managing HbH disease. Unfortunately, clinical trials for these novel therapies have 
included only a small minority of patients with α-thalassaemia, which may limit the applicability of the data to 
this group. As such, dedicated research focused specifically on patients with α-thalassaemia, rather than 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
467 
treating them as a small subset within larger cohort of individuals with β-thalassaemia, is essential to fully 
understand the impact of these advances on the management of α-thalassaemias. 
Curative therapies, such as haematopoietic stem cell transplantation, are important treatment options for 
selected patients with β-thalassaemia. However, data on the outcomes of haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation in HbH disease is scarse. Similar to other aspects of management, current approaches are 
largely derived from β-thalassaemia practices. This is problematic, as the more severe forms of α-thalassaemia 
where stem cell transplantation may be beneficial often involve different pathophysiology, potentially requiring 
tailored approaches. Dedicated research is needed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation specifically in patients with α-thalassaemia, ensuring that treatment strategies are 
optimized for their unique clinical and biological characteristics. Similarly, while gene therapies are becoming 
a viable therapeutic option for patients with β-thalassaemia, this approach remains in the earliest phases of 
development for α-thalassaemia. 
 
ADVOCACY 
Advocacy plays a pivotal role in improving care, clinical outcomes, and quality of life for people with chronic 
disease. This is well demonstrated by the significant progress made in β-thalassaemia. Strong advocacy efforts 
have led to increased awareness, securing much needed resources, better access to treatments, and the 
development of comprehensive care guidelines for patients with β-thalassaemia. However, similar advocacy 
initiatives are severely lacking for individuals with α-thalassaemia, leaving this group underserved and 
overlooked. Despite its prevalence and clinical significance, α-thalassaemia has not received the same level of 
attention. To address these disparities, there is an urgent need for stronger advocacy focused on α-
thalassaemia. This includes raising awareness, mobilizing resources, and collaborations among healthcare 
providers, policymakers, patient organizations, and researchers. By amplifying advocacy efforts, we can ensure 
that patients with α-thalassaemia receive an appropriate level of care, support, and attention, ultimately 
improving their clinical outcomes and quality of life. 
 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
To improve the clinical outcomes of individuals with α-thalassemia, a multifaceted approach is required. 
Collaborative efforts between clinicians, healthcare providers, funding organizations, governments, and 
industry across Eastern and Western regions are vital to advancing patient care and reducing the disease burden 
in resource-constrained areas. Prioritizing education, research, and the adoption of evidence-based, cost-
effective strategies is critical. Conducting robust, prospective studies will help better understand patient 
outcomes and unmet needs. Furthermore, the creation of international collaborative registries can provide 
valuable insights into the less common forms of α-thalassemia, addressing key gaps in knowledge and care. 
 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
468 
CONCLUSION 
The current state of affairs across the world with regards to the provision of appropriate medical care and 
effective prevention for thalassaemia is far from being a satisfactory one. 
The countries where >80% of our global population is born and resides, present great challenges in providing 
access to appropriate medical, social and public health services. Most of these patients live in countries which 
score C, D, E and F in their clinical services thus suggesting suboptimal care, including poor access to adequate 
and safe blood, specialized and reliable iron load measurements and effective iron chelation; all of which 
constitute the cornerstone of the management of β-thalassaemia. The value and contribution of MDC and the 
existence of Reference Centres are elements of health services that are very underestimated in almost every 
county across the world; contributing to the anticipation of high rates of morbidity and mortality across these 
countries (for more information see Chapter on Disease Burden in this Global Review). 
Table 5 demonstrates well that in the majority of cases where prevention effectiveness scored A (i.e. very 
effective), the quality of treatment services provided to patients also scored high. As effectiveness of prevention 
drifted to low or very limited effectiveness, so did the level of effective of treatment services. 
Basic statistical analysis (see Annex 1), where this was possible to be performed, confirmed to a great extent 
our findings and/or conclusions: wherever prevention score indicated effectiveness in a country, the survival 
rate of patients was higher. Similarly, wherever iron load monitoring services and iron chelation treatment were 
available, and their effectiveness anticipated or documented in literature, survival rates were higher. Certainly, 
the HDI level of the country was shown to be heavily related to the availability or not of iron load monitoring 
services (mainly MRI testing). 
 
 
 
 
One can therefore only conclude that the rights of the patients with  this disorder (which is the focus of 
this report) are to date tragically violated and TIF calls upon its member National Thalassaemia 
Associations to engage actively and productively with their national health and social decision makers and 
to join forces with the WHO and every relevant stakeholder in their country, importantly including the 
healthcare professionals community, for immediate action with regards to achieving improvements in the 
quality of services provided by their health care systems to patients with this thalassemia. 
The unmet needs are many and multiple and unfortunately concern the majority of the patients with 
thalassaemia across countries in every Region of the world. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
469 
 
Figure 1. Prevention and Thalassaemia Services 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
470 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Angastiniotis M, Petrou M, Loukopoulos 
D, Modell B, Farmakis D, Englezos P, 
Eleftheriou 
A. 
The 
Prevention 
of 
Thalassemia Revisited: A Historical and 
Ethical Perspective by the Thalassemia 
International Federation. Hemoglobin. 
2021 
Jan 
18:1-13. 
doi: 
10.1080/03630269.2021.1872612. 
PMID: 
33461349. 
2. Khandros 
E, 
Kwiatkowski 
JL. 
Beta 
Thalassemia: 
Monitoring 
and 
New 
Treatment Approaches. Hematol Oncol 
Clin North Am. 2019 Jun;33(3):339-353. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2019.01.003. 
PMID: 
31030806. 
3. 
Anionwu 
E, 
Leary A, 
Johnson 
K. 
Protecting specialist roles in haemoglobin 
disorders. Nurs Times. 2012 Jun 26-Jul 
2;108(26):18. PMID: 22866484. 
4. Tangayi S, Anionwu E, Westerdale N, 
Johnson K. A skills framework for sickle 
cell disease and thalassaemia. Nurs Times. 
2011 
Oct 
18-24;107(41):12-3. 
PMID: 
23251980. 
5. Cogliandro T, Derchi G, Mancuso L, Mayer 
MC, Pannone B, Pepe A, Pili M, Bina P, 
Cianciulli P, De Sanctis V, Maggio A; 
Society for the Study of Thalassemia and 
Hemoglobinopathies (SoSTE). Guideline 
recommendations for heart complications 
in thalassemia major. J Cardiovasc Med 
(Hagerstown). 2008 May;9(5):515-25. doi: 
10.2459/JCM.0b013e3282f20847. 
PMID: 
18404006. 
6. Kremastinos DT, Farmakis D, Aessopos A, 
Hahalis G, Hamodraka E, Tsiapras D, 
Keren 
A. 
Beta-thalassemia 
cardiomyopathy: 
history, 
present 
considerations, and future perspectives. 
Circ Heart Fail. 2010 May;3(3):451-8. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.913863
. PMID: 20484195. 
7. 
Di Marco V, Capra M, Angelucci E, Borgna-
Pignatti C, Telfer P, Harmatz P, Kattamis A, 
Prossamariti L, Filosa A, Rund D, 
Gamberini 
MR, 
Cianciulli 
P, 
De 
Montalembert M, Gagliardotto F, Foster 
G, Grangè JD, Cassarà F, Iacono A, 
Cappellini MD, Brittenham GM, Prati D, 
Pietrangelo A, Craxì A, Maggio A; Italian 
Society for the Study of Thalassemia and 
Haemoglobinopathies; Italian Association 
for the Study of the Liver. Management of 
chronic viral hepatitis in patients with 
thalassemia: recommendations from an 
international panel. Blood. 2010 Oct 
21;116(16):2875-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-
2009-11-248724. PMID: 20551378. 
8. Kountouras D, Tsagarakis NJ, Fatourou E, 
Dalagiorgos E, Chrysanthos N, Berdoussi 
H, Vgontza N, Karagiorga M, Lagiandreou 
A, Kaligeros K, Voskaridou E, Roussou P, 
Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Koskinas J. Liver 
disease in adult transfusion-dependent 
beta-thalassaemic patients: investigating 
the role of iron overload and chronic HCV 
infection. Liver Int. 2013 Mar;33(3):420-7. 
doi: 10.1111/liv.12095. PMID: 23402611. 
9.  
10. De Sanctis V, Soliman AT, Elsedfy H, 
Skordis N, Kattamis C, Angastiniotis M, 
Karimi M, Yassin MA, El Awwa A, Stoeva I, 
Raiola G, Galati MC, Bedair EM, Fiscina B, 
El Kholy M. Growth and endocrine 
disorders 
in 
thalassemia: 
The 
international 
network 
on 
endocrine 
complications in thalassemia (I-CET) 
position statement and guidelines. Indian 
J Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;17(1):8-18. 
doi: 10.4103/2230-8210.107808. PMID: 
23776848. 
11. Tzoulis P, Shah F, Jones R, Prescott E, 
Barnard M. Joint diabetes thalassaemia 
clinic: an effective new model of care. 
Hemoglobin. 2014; 38(2):104-10. doi: 
10.3109/03630269.2013.862541. 
PMID: 
24351096. 
12. Rikos, N., Giannadaki, GK., Spontidaki, A. 
et al. Health status, anxiety, depression, 
and quality of life of patients with 
thalassemia. J Public Health (Berl.) (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10389-020-
01241-y 
13. Tuck SM. Fertility and pregnancy in 
thalassemia major. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2005;1054:300-7. 
doi: 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
471 
10.1196/annals.1345.062. 
PMID: 
16339678. 
14. Origa R, Piga A, Quarta G, Forni GL, Longo 
F, Melpignano A, Galanello R. Pregnancy 
and 
beta-thalassemia: 
an 
Italian 
multicenter experience. Haematologica. 
2010 
Mar;95(3):376-81. 
doi: 
10.3324/haematol.2009.012393. 
PMID: 
19903676. 
15. Forni GL, Puntoni M, Boeri E, et al. The 
influence of treatment in specialized 
centers on survival of patients with 
thalassemia 
major. Am J 
Hematol. 
2009;84:317–318..
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
472 
ANNEX 1 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
Several statistical methodologies can be applied in order to examine the different aspects that could have an 
impact on thalassaemia patients. A group of countries across the globe has been categorised based on the score 
they received for prevention and thalassaemia services. Furthermore, some other measurements have been 
taken into account for the same countries such as income, HDI and the number of expected thalassaemia births. 
From a statistical point of view, our goal is to determine how those factors can be related or how the answer 
‘YES’ on survival rate of the A category of countries is more likely to be occurred than the D category for 
example. 
The following results are based on the TIF database and the excel file ‘UNMET NEEDS TABLE TEST’. 
 
THE WORDS 
“EXISTS” – reflects presence of iron chelation treatment hospital/centre bases with no nationwide support or 
co-ordination 
“YES” - reflects the nationwide co-ordination and support related to iron chelation treatment anticipated to 
have a certain level of effectiveness 
“NO” – reflecting no published results which relate to low survival rates 
To have a more sufficient understanding of our data, a brief analysis of the numerical variables is required. 
Below we write down the mean, standard deviation and some other indicators of the distribution of our data. 
 
HEALTH EXPENDITURE (% OF GDP) 
• 
The mean of the countries’ health expenditure 6.56% 
• 
The minimum value is 2.25% and it belongs to Laos 
• 
The maximum value is 16.89% and it belongs to USA 
• 
The median (the value which is in the middle of our sample) is 5.92% 
• 
75% of the countries have a health expenditure lower than 8.66% 
• 
25% of the countries have a health expenditure lower than 4.13% 
• 
The variance is 9.04 while the standard deviation is 3.006 
• 
The skewness of the sample is 0.92, something which demonstrates that the distribution of the sample 
is not completely symmetric. 
• 
From the boxplot and the histogram of our data we find one outlier (a value that is much higher than 
the mean) and that is the USA while most of the other countries have a health expenditure very close 
to their mean 
• 
From the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Statistical test we conclude that our sample of the health expenditure 
is normally distributed. 
• 
In the graph below (histogram) we can see how many times we observe a specific value, and this is an 
indication about the sample’s distribution. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
473 
 
Note: From the statistical analysis Palestine removed because of not given value 
 
UNDER 5 MORTALITY RATE (PER 1000 LIVES) 
• 
The mean of the countries’ under 5 mortality rate is 16.68 
• 
The minimum mortality rate is 2.30 and it belongs to Palestine 
• 
The maximum mortality rate is 67.2 and it belongs to Pakistan 
• 
The median is 9.85 
• 
75% of the countries have an under 5 mortality rate lower than 21.15. 
• 
25% of the countries have an under 5 mortality rate lower than 6.52 
• 
The variance is 245.4 while the standard deviation is 15.67 
• 
The skewness of the sample is 1.65, and it shows that the distribution of the sample has a tale to the 
right (not symmetric) 
• 
From the boxplot and histogram of the sample we can see that we have several outliers 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
474 
INFANT MORTALITY RATE (PER 1000 LIVES) 
• 
The mean of the countries’ infant mortality rate is 13.96 
• 
The minimum mortality rate is 2 and it belongs to Cyprus, Singapore and Sweden 
• 
The maximum mortality rate is 56 and it belongs to Pakistan 
• 
75% of the countries have an infant mortality rate lower than 18 lives per 1000 
• 
25% of the countries have an infant mortality rate lower than 6 lives per 1000 
• 
The median of the sample is 9 
• 
The variance is 155.6 while the standard deviation is 12.47 
• 
From the boxplot and histogram of the sample it appears that there are a few extreme observations  
• 
The skewness is 1.5 and the distribution is very similar with the under 5 mortality rate’s one 
 
 
EXPECTED B-THALASSAEMIA BIRTHS (EBTB) PER YEAR (PER 1000 
BIRTHS) 
There are huge differences between the number of expected b-thalassaemia births and some countries must 
be excluded if we want to test a hypothesis later.  
• 
The mean is 0.826 
• 
The minimum is 0.0014 and it belongs to Austria 
• 
The maximum is 8.97 and it belongs to Maldives 
• 
The median is 0.32 
• 
75% of the countries have an EBTB lower than 0.6138 
• 
25% of the countries have an EBTB lower than 0.105 
• 
The variance of the sample is 2.58 while the standard deviation is 1.6 
• 
The skewness of the sample is 3.458 
• 
The interquartile range of the sample is 0.5085 
• 
As we can see by the histogram of the sample below there are a few countries with very high EBBT per 
year, much higher than the majority of the population of the other regions 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
475 
 
** Some of the countries have an extremely small b-thalassaemia carrier rate and it is mainly defined by migration 
reasons. That results to a sharp decrease of expected b-thalassaemia births, with their numbers dramatically close 
to zero. Keeping that in mind, a more sufficient statistical analysis of that variable would be the one where we only 
include the countries whose EBTB is higher than 0.1. In fact, from the 50 countries in our data the 38 met this 
condition. ** 
 
**EXPECTED B-THALASSAEMIA BIRTHS (EBTB) PER YEAR (PER 
1000 BIRTHS): 
• 
The mean is 1.08 
• 
The minimum is 0.1 and it belongs to Trinidad and Tobago 
• 
The maximum is obviously 8.97 and it belongs to Maldives 
• 
The median is 0.415 
• 
75% of the countries have an EBTB lower than 0.925 
• 
25% of the countries have an EBTB lower than 0.223 
• 
The variance of the sample is 3.14 while the standard deviation is 1.77 
• 
The skewness of the sample is 3.014 which is slightly reduced  
• 
The interquartile range of the sample is 0.699  
• 
The histogram of the new conditions of expected B-Thalassaemia births is very similar with the 
previous one 
 
Note: As expected, the mean of the second analysis on EBBT rose because of the reduced number of observations 
and the reduced number of values. Although the variance increased, the skewness had a slight dip comparing to 
the first analysis something that indicates that the new sample has a little smaller ‘tale’ to the right. 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
476 
 
 
HYPOTHESIS TEST 
With a theoretical background in statistics, we are going to be able to recognise the major issues that 
thalassaemia patients face. We will examine how the prevention of every country helps the survival rate or how 
the factors income and HDI influence the process. Moreover, analysis of the iron load monitoring or health 
expenditure’s relation to the expected b-thalassaemia births per year, are also some topics of interest. 
However, we must proceed with caution with the results we are going to produce. Any conclusions about the 
sample and the hypothesis we test every time should not be taken for granted. That’s because in order to 
perform the statistical tests, some assumptions and conditions about the samples must be fulfilled. If these 
conditions are not satisfied, the results may be misleading and not reflect the reality, and our tests won’t be 
valid. For example, we should have a clear picture about the theoretical distribution of our sample before using 
a specific mathematical model. Also, every observation (in this case every country) must be independent with 
each other. Many observations in the population, is a situation that offers much more secure results too. With 
all that in mind we begin to examine some of the issues where I mentioned before. 
 
PREVENTION-SURVIVAL RATE 
The following test is offered to test the relation between prevention techniques and survival rate of each 
country. Our aim is to decide if every country, based on the category ‘A-D’ has an equal probability of having 
the statement ‘NO’ in survival rate. We are going to use the Chi square test of independence which is a non-
parametric statistical test and does not assume something about the sample’s distribution. The only 
requirement is that the countries are independent.  
Our null hypothesis is: ‘Variables Prevention and Survival Rate are independent’.    
What we are trying to say by that is that if the null hypothesis is true, then Countries from any category have 
the same chance of answering yes to the survival rate and it does not depend on the prevention of each 
government. 
Note: This statistical test only examines if the two variables are related. It is not used to decide how they are related 
or how the levels of every variable are related. That we can figure it out by the graph and tables. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
477 
The table and graph below sum up the data we have collected: 
Prevention Category/Survival Rate 
Exists 
No 
Yes 
A 
0 
2 
4 
B 
1 
8 
4 
C 
0 
6 
0 
D 
3 
22 
0 
 
 
 
After performing the Chi-Square test of independence, we calculated the p-value of the test, and it was 
p=0.002215. This means that we have strong evidence against the null hypothesis and if we assume that the 
null hypothesis is true the probability of having a sample that extreme like the one we used now is 0.002215. 
Therefore, in a 95% level of confidence we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is a relation 
between the status of the countries’ survival rate status and their prevention score category. From the table 
and graph, we can clearly see that countries with ‘D’ prevention category have a much higher ratio of ‘NO’ in 
the survival rate status than the others. 
 
IRON LOAD MONITORING-SURVIVAL RATE 
Next up is the Iron Load Monitoring and Survival Rate relationship. According to TIF’s surveys there are many 
inequalities in iron load monitoring and treatment of thalassaemia patients across the globe. In regions where 
optimal care is possible the effective control of iron toxicity has rocketed the survival rate in patients. In 
countries less financially developed this might not be the case. 
Using the same statistical test as before, we will test if the iron load monitoring is massively related to the 
survival rate of every country or if it is not statistical significand. The null hypothesis again is: ‘Variables Iron 
Load Monitoring and Survival Rate are independent’, which means that the survival rate of the thalassaemia 
patient does not depend on the successful iron load monitoring of his or her country. 
• 
Note 1: In our database we have a particularly small sample of countries most of them not having a 
survival rate of NO. This does not reflect the situation in every country across the globe. 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
478 
• 
Note 2: The countries Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan have been excluded from the test because of their 
unknown status. 
 
Survival Rate 
Exists 
No 
Yes 
Iron Load 
 
 
 
Exists 
1 
25 
3 
No 
0 
7 
0 
Yes 
3 
3 
5 
 
The table and graph of those two variables are shown below: 
 
 
Our p-value of the given test is p= 0.001455<0.05. So, we conclude, with a 95% level of confidence that we reject 
again the null hypothesis. Thus, there are statistically significant differences between the status of the survival 
rates depending on the Iron load monitoring of every country. If we had accepted the null hypothesis, we would 
imply that iron load monitoring is not related with the survival status of the patients of every country. 
 
HDI-IRON LOAD MONITORING 
Based on the previous test’s results, another interesting group of categories would be the HDI (Human 
Development Index) of every country and Iron load monitoring. It is important to understand that iron load 
monitoring could be quite an expensive process, and some countries have limited resources for their patient’s 
healthcare. To test the effectiveness and availability of iron load monitoring TIF divided the countries in three 
separate HDI categories: Very High, High, Medium /Low. 
Using the Chi-Squared test of independence again, we test the Null Hypothesis: ‘Variables HDI and Iron Load 
Monitoring are independent’. More specifically, we are trying to determine if the Iron Load Monitoring status in 
every country has nothing to do with the country’s HDI level. The table and graph of those two variables are 
shown below: 
Note: The countries Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan have been excluded from the test because of their unknown 
status. 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
479 
 
Iron Monitoring/HDI Level 
Exists 
No 
Yes 
High 
13 
1 
1 
Medium/Low 
6 
6 
0 
Very High 
10 
0 
10 
 
 
To test the statistical significance of our null hypothesis we must calculate how probable a sample that extreme 
would be shown again i.e. find the p-value of the test. In this case p-value=2.551*10-5, which is a tiny value very 
close to zero. Thus, we reject the null hypothesis in 99% level of confidence, and we conclude that the factor 
HDI and IRON LOAD MONITORING are heavily related to each other. 
 
HEALTH EXPENDITURE- IRON LOAD MONITORING 
One final test we can conduct regarding the financial situation around iron load monitoring, is about the health 
expenditure of every country. We are going to examine the differences in the average of health expenditure 
percentages of the three different levels of the factor ‘IRON LOAD MONITORING’. The test is called Analysis of 
Variance, and it can be applied with the F-statistics. After the analysis in R, we have the following results: 
• 
The category ‘NO’ of Iron Load Monitoring has on average 1.2356 lower health expenditure percentage 
than the category ‘EXISTS’ 
• 
The category ‘YES’ of Iron Load Monitoring has on average 1.9807 higher health expenditure 
percentage than the category ‘EXISTS’ 
• 
The category ‘YES’ of Iron Load Monitoring has on average 3.2343 higher health expenditure 
percentage than the category ‘NO’. 
• 
For the null hypothesis: ‘There are no statistical differences between the means of the levels (‘yes’, 
’exists’, ’no’) of the factor Iron Load Monitoring’ we found the p-value of the F-statistics equal to: 
0.02556. So we reject the null hypothesis in a 95% confidence level, but with some reservations. Thus, 
we conclude that there are differences between those three categories  
• 
Using Tukey’s Multiple Comparison on means, a 95% family wise confidence level for the three 
categories’ differences are:  
• 
YES-NO: [0.31,6.15] 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
480 
• 
YES-EXISTS: [-0.19,4.16] 
• 
NO-EXISTS: [-1.25,3,75] 
• 
Note1: The countries Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan have been excluded from the test because of their 
unknown status. 
• 
Note2: Palestine has been excluded from the test because of no value given 
• 
Note3: USA removed because of the extreme value of Health Expenditure which could cause problems 
in the used model. 
• 
Note4: We assumed that the sample from the health expenditure for every country follows a normal 
distribution. 
A critical chapter in the availability and the effectiveness of iron overload control is iron chelation. In this stage 
of our statistical tests, we are going to examine the same relationships of our variables but this time with the 
factor ‘IRON CHELATION’. Now we only have two available levels instead of the three of ‘IRON LOAD 
MONITORING’ and those are the categories ‘YES’ and ‘EXISTS’. 
 
IRON CHELATION-SURVIVAL RATE 
Once again, our null hypothesis is that the two variables are independent with each other, i.e. iron chelation 
provided in any country is not involved or has an impact in the patients’ survival rate. The table and graph 
provide us with an idea: 
Survival Rate 
‘Exists’ 
‘No’ 
‘Yes’ 
Iron Chelation Provided 
 
 
 
‘Exists’ 
1 
29 
3 
‘Yes’ 
3 
6 
5 
 
 
 
Performing the Chi-Squared test we have a p-value=0.0048, which means we reject again the null hypothesis in 
a 95% level of confidence. A situation like that is very unlikely to be occurred if we had accepted the null 
hypothesis, therefore we must assume that there is a form of relation between the variables ‘Iron chelation’ 
and ‘Survival Rate’. It is understandable that patients where in their country have an Iron Chelation which 
GLOBAL THALASSAEMIA REVIEW 
481 
‘EXISTS’ have a much higher probability of having ‘NO’ in their survival rate status than the patients whose 
country has ‘YES’ in iron chelation provided. 
 
HDI-IRON CHELATION 
Repeating the same steps and making the same assumptions, we test the relationship between HDI and Iron 
Chelation: 
 
HDI Level/Iron Chelation 
Exists 
Yes 
High 
14 
1 
Medium/Low 
11 
1 
Bery High 
8 
12 
 
 
 
The null hypothesis of the chi-squared test is as usual the same: ‘Factors HDI and Iron Chelation are 
independent’. The p-value of the test is 0.0005 which is very small. So we tend to reject the null hypothesis in a 
99% level of confidence and accept the alternative hypothesis: ‘Factors HDI and Iron Chelation are not 
independent variables’. From the graph we can observe that countries with high and medium - low HDI are 
more likely to have ‘EXIST’ in their iron chelation status, while most of the countries with very high HDI have a 
‘YES’ status in their iron chelation situation. 
Note: The countries Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan have been excluded from the test because of their unknown 
status. 
 
 
 
UNMET NEEDS OF PATIENTS WITH THALASSAEMIA: 
TIF’S PERSPECTIVE 
482 
HEALTH EXPENDITURE-IRON CHELATION 
Given the fact that the health expenditure percentage of every country is normally distributed, we can also 
examine the relationship between Iron Chelation and health Expenditure. More precisely, we are going to 
analyse the variance of the two different levels of Iron Chelation and come to a conclusion about their health 
expenditure means. The results of the statistical analysis and the F-statistics are the following: 
• 
The countries from the category ‘YES’ of Iron Chelation have on average a 2.0480 higher percentage 
than the countries from the category ‘EXIST’ 
• 
For the null hypothesis: ‘There are no statistical differences between the means of the levels (‘yes’, 
’exists’) of the factor Iron Chelation’ we found the p-value of the F-statistics equal to: 0.01468. So we 
reject the null hypothesis in a 95% confidence but interestingly, we do not reject the null hypothesis in 
a 99% level of confidence. We must point out that our decision about the level of confidence reflects 
the acceptance or not of the null hypothesis, and that shows that there are not huge statistical 
differences between the means of the levels of Iron Chelation 
• 
Using Tukey’s Multiple Comparison on means, a 95% family wise confidence level for the two 
categories’ differences is ‘YES’-‘EXIST’: [0.4236-3.6723] 
• 
Note1: The countries Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan have been excluded from the test because of their 
unknown status. 
• 
Note2: Palestine has been excluded from the test because of no value given 
• 
Note3: USA removed because of the extreme value of Health Expenditure which could cause problems 
in the used model. 
 
 
ABOUT THE THALASSAEMIA INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION (TIF): 
Thalassaemia International Federation, a non-governmental, patient-driven umbrella 
organization, established in 1986, supports today, the rights of patients for acce ss to quality 
health, social and other care through its work with over 200 national thalassaemia associations 
in 62 countries across the world. It was founded by a small group of doctors and 
patients/parents who represented National Patient Associations, mainly from Cyprus, Greece, 
Italy, UK, and USA i.e. countries where thalassaemia had been recognized early as a genetic, 
hereditary disorder with huge medical, public health, social and economic repercussions if left 
unaddressed in terms of both effective prevention and management. 
Thus, these were the countries where strong research activity was initiated and the first control  
programmes were implemented in the early 1980s, with measurable success. The rationale of  
these founding members lay on the establishment of international umbrella organization to 
build on the accumulated experience and the knowledge gained, aiming to support the efforts 
of other countries since by the mid-1980s the worldwide prevalence of the disease had been 
well verified. 
OUR MISSION: The prioritisation of thalassaemia on national health agendas and the 
development 
and implementation of effective disease-specific control (prevention and clinical management)  
programmes within national healthcare systems based on universal coverage.  
OUR VISION: To support the provision of equal access of every patient with thalassaemia to 
high quality health, social and other care in a truly patient-centred healthcare setting. 
OUR VALUES: Transparency, reliability, ethos, accountability, independence and patient-
centredness. 
OUR WORK: Education, advocacy, collaborations/networking, research, raising awareness.  
OUR PARTNERS: 
• 
World Health Organization: in official relations since 1996  
• 
United Nations: in special consultative status with the United Nations Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC) since 2017 
• 
Council of Europe: Participatory status in the Conference of International NGOs since 
2019 
• 
European Union: Official partners of the European Commission in the field of Health 
since 2018 
 
[ OUR MOTTO: UNITY & KNOWLEDGE CONSTITUTE OUR STRENGTH! ] 
